a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing. The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish. They didn't saw any fish bigger than this! Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM! They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
Why is the sky blue?
It's not always blue.Is not it?
Why are the leaves green?
They are not always green.Is not it?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow.Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is the blood red?
There is iron in the blood.It makes it red.
Why is salt white?I do not know!
Why have you not done your homework?Miss, it is all because of the cat.
The cat sat on the tree.So I took a ladder to climb the tree.
But the ladder was broken. So I took a hammer.The hammer made a noise.So the baby woke up.
Mother ran out to see the baby.So the monkey came in.
The monkey ate all the food.So there was no food for us.
Father bought chicken biryani for us.So the dog followed him.
The dog ate my notebook.So I couldn't bring my homework.
So, the dog ate your homework?
Yes, Miss. But it is all because of the cat.
I love forests!
Last week I went to Kibale forest.
I saw many trees. I saw Fig, Muvule, Palm, and Ebony trees.
I saw chimpanzees, baboons, and monkeys.
I saw different birds. I saw crested cranes, eagles, and owls.
I laughed when I saw a big elephant with a little tail.
I saw so many different animals, birds, and plants.
In the busy city,  far away from a caring life at home,  lived a group of homeless boys. They welcomed each day just as it came. On one morning,  the boys were packing their mats after sleeping on cold pavements. To chase away the cold they lit a fire. Among the group of boys was Magozwe. He was the youngest.
When Magozwe's parents died,  he was only five years old. He went to live with his uncle. This man did not care about the child. He did not give Magozwe enough food. He made the boy do a lot of hard work.
If Magozwe complained or questioned,  his uncle beat him. When Magozwe asked if he could go to school,  his uncle beat him and said,  "You're too stupid to learn anything." After three years of this treatment Magozwe ran away from his uncle. He started living on the street.
Street life was difficult and most of the boys struggled daily just to get food. Sometimes they were arrested,  sometimes they were beaten. When they were sick,  there was no one to help. The boys survived from begging, and selling plastics and other recycling.
One day while Magozwe was looking through the dustbins,  he found an old tattered storybook. He cleaned the dirt from it and put it in his sack. Every day after that he would take out the book and look at the pictures. He did not know how to read the words.
The pictures told the story of a boy who grew up to be a pilot. Magozwe would daydream of being a pilot. Sometimes,  he imagined that he was the boy in the story.
It was cold and Magozwe was standing on the road begging. A man walked up to him. "Hello,  I'm Thomas. I work at a place where you can get something to eat," he said. Thomas pointed to a house nearby. "I hope you will go there to get some food?" he asked. Magozwe looked at the man,  and then at the house. "Maybe," he said,  and walked away.
Over the months that followed,  the homeless boys got used to seeing Thomas around. He liked to talk to people,  especially people living on the streets. Thomas listened to the stories of people's lives. He was patient and respectful. Some of the boys started going to the yellow house to get food.
Magozwe was sitting on the pavement looking at his picture book when Thomas sat down next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a pilot," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "I don't know,  I can't read," said Magozwe.
When they met,  Magozwe began to tell his own story to Thomas. It was the story of his uncle and why he ran away. Thomas didn't talk a lot,  and he didn't tell Magozwe what to do,  but he always listened carefully.
Around Magozwe's tenth birthday,  Thomas gave him a new storybook. It was a story about a village boy who grew up to be a famous soccer player. Thomas read that story to Magozwe many times,  until one day he said,  "I think it's time you went to school and learned to read. What do you think?" Thomas explained that he knew of a place where children could stay,  and go to school.
Magozwe thought about this new place,  and about going to school. What if his uncle was right and he was too stupid to learn anything? What if they beat him at this new place? He was afraid. "Maybe it is better to stay living on the street," he thought.
He shared his fears with Thomas. Over time the man reassured the boy that life could be better at the new place.
And so Magozwe moved into a house and shared the room with two other boys. There were ten children living at that house. Along with Auntie Cissy and her husband,  three dogs,  a cat,  and an old goat.
Magozwe started school and it was difficult. He had a lot to catch up. Sometimes he wanted to give up. But he thought about the pilot and the soccer player in the storybooks. Like them,  he did not give up.
Magozwe was sitting in the yard at the house where he stayed,  reading a storybook from school. Thomas came up and sat next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a teacher," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "His name is Magozwe," said Magozwe with a smile.
Chicken and Millipede were friends. But they were always competing. One day, they decided to play football to see who was the best player.
They went to the football field and started their game. Chicken was fast, but Millipede was faster. Chicken kicked far, but Millipede kicked further. Chicken started to feel angry.
They decided to play a penalty shoot-out. First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede dribbled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she lost. She was a very bad loser. Millipede started laughing because his friend was making such a fuss.
Chicken was so angry that she opened her beak wide and swallowed Millipede.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Mother Millipede asked, "Have you seen my child?" Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. "Help me mom!" cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked around and listened carefully. The voice came from inside the chicken.
Mother Millipede shouted, "Use your special power my child!" Millipedes can make a bad smell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill.
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed. And coughed. Millipede tasted disgusting!
Chicken coughed until she coughed out Millipede. Mother Millipede and her child crawled up a tree to hide.
From that time, all chickens and millipedes were enemies.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
He loves food, but he is too lazy to cook.
"Yes. Help me with stirring," says Rabbit. But Anansi is lazy.
Anansi ties some web around his leg and to Rabbit's pot.
"Monkeys, can I share your beans?" "Yes. Help us with chopping."
"Warthog, can I share your potatoes?" "Yes. Help me with preparing."
Soon,  each of Anansi's 8 legs is tied to a pot.
All 8 legs are being pulled! "Stop pulling!" cries Anansi.
Anansi's legs stretched! And so all spiders have long thin legs.
The wind roars. It roars past our home.
The wind is powerful. It tears my kite from my hand.
I run after my kite. The wind blows me away from the kite!
The wind becomesa tornado. It carries my kite higher and higher.
The tornado swallows me up! I see nothing, I touch nothing.
Where is my kite now? Perhaps it is caught in a tree.
Perhaps my kite is still flying in the sky.
The wind finally dies down. I am still spinning.
When I stop spinning I look around. Where did the wind go?
I cannot see my kite anywhere. I cannot hear the wind anymore.
Perhaps tomorrowI will find my kite.
Now, I must go home, before the wind starts to roar again.
Byantaka had a cow and a small pot for water.
He went to borrow a bigger pot from his neighbour.
Byantaka put a small pot inside the neighbour’s big pot.
He carried the pots to the neighbour.
“Your pot gave birth,” Byantaka told the neighbour.
Byantaka went to the neighbour to borrow the pot again.
He did not return it. The neighbour went to ask.
Byantaka said, “It died. I was coming to tell you.”
The neighbour shouted, “I have never heard of a pot dying!”
Byantaka replied, "My friend, everything that reproduces must die."
The neighbour went to court to report Byantaka.
The judge said, “Every living thing which reproduces must die.”
Byantaka got the big pot and his neighbour lost.
One day my Brother and I were walking near the  road.
A big truck was driving down the mountain.
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
Tortoise and Squirrel need money.
They make plates to sell at the market.
Tortoise sees a fight at the market.
Squirrel and Mole are fighting.
"Leave my friend alone!" shouts Tortoise.
Mole bites Tortoise on the nose.
His broken nose hurts.
Tortoise has a crooked nose because he rushed to fight.
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie, Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can seethe huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing."There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone, I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes, 12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says."I like counting in 4s," says Duksie, "it's quicker." "I'm goingto count in 3s, just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look, there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did youpack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asksthe children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side, to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see, how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself, "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen andget a surprise forthe children!"
Back at the farm, Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them, "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what shemight bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of apples falls onto the table. "See, I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children, "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. They count: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 1 apple left over. Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next, they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted. "Yay!" shout the children."
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
"I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf," cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
"If I do not have water, I will die," cried Little Ant. "I must go to the river I heard about."
"The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away," warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. "I will die if I don't drink some water."
So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
"Help me someone. Help me please!" he called.
"Quick, climb on," said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
White Dove saved Little Ant from drowning in the river.
"I will stay here until I can thank the dove," decided Little Ant. "I will wait until she comes back to drink."
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
"There is a big white dove that comes here to drink," said one boy.
"Let's kill it and have it for supper tonight," said the other boy.
"I cannot let the boys kill White Dove," thought Little Ant. "But I am so tiny, what can I do?"
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
The naughty boys got ready to shoot White Dove.
Little Ant had an idea.
Little Ant jumped onto one boy's foot. He bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. "Ouch!" he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Mother, Father and Laraba are talking about how to stay healthy.
Laraba asked at school, "Why must we wash our hands?"
Teacher said, "Our hands have germs on them, but you can't see germs."
"Germs are very tiny. We need a microscope to see them."
Laraba looked through the microscope.She saw the germs from her hand.
"Viruses and bacteria are types of germs.Germs can make us sick."
"Washing hands stops viruses and bacteria from spreading," said Teacher.
Father is making a tool for washing hands.
Laraba asks, "How does this tool work?"
"The wooden step tilts the container, and water flows out."
"Wash with soap and water. Slowly count to 20 while you wash."
"Clever Dad! Now, can you greet with your elbow?"
Selemeng loves cats. There are many cats at her house.
Selemeng has one black cat. This cat eats a lot of meat.
Selemeng has one fat cat. This cat eats everything.
Cat number three, runs up a tree. This cat gets stuck in the tree.
Selemeng climbs the tree. She gets stuck with cat three. Selemeng's mother has to help them get down.
Selemeng has two lazy cats. They lie outside in the sun all day.
Selemeng has three busy cats. They catch rats in the kitchen at night.
Selemeng has one dog. His name is Lirafi. Lirafi has no friends. He is sad.
Selemeng's cats do not like Lirafi. They chase him out of the house. Lirafi runs away.
Selemeng finds Lirafi and brings him home. The cats are not happy. They do not want to see Lirafi again.
How many cats does Selemeng have? She has eight cats.
How many dogs does Selemeng have? She has one dog. Where is Lirafi now?
How many cats do you have at home?How many dogs do you have at home?
Sheep lived in the city. She got tired of city life and decided to go to the bush.On her way she met Hyena who had not eaten for many days.
She greeted Hyena over and over again, "Brother Hyena, how are you? Brother Hyena, how are you?"Hyena answered Sheep, "Don't greet me over and over. Do something to end my hunger."
When Sheep heard this, she started running. Suddenly, she reached Lion's den. Hyena was running after her. Hyena arrived at the den and finally stopped, throwing dust into Lion's eyes.
Lion said to Hyena, "Can't we even find peace in our dens? You throw dust into our eyes!" Hyena answered, "King, I did not mean to disrespect you! I am only running after my food!"
Lion said, "You are food to me, too, Hyena. Did I chase you? You came to me. Don't blame me later."
Then Lion said to Sheep, "Why did you come to the bush?" Sheep replied, "I came because I am a diviner."
Lion said, "Prepare traditional medicine to prove that you are truly a diviner." Sheep replied, "My medicine is expensive." Lion said, "That is no problem, whatever it costs. There is nothing that is impossible for me."
Sheep said, "The medicine is Hyena's ear." Lion cut off Hyena's ear and gave it to Sheep. Sheep put Hyena's ear inside a jar of honey and gave it to Lion.
Lion ate Hyena's ear and found it so sweet. He asked Sheep, "Is it possible for me to have the second ear?"
Sheep said, "Yes, it is possible my king." So Lion cut off Hyena's second ear and brought it to Sheep. Sheep put the ear inside a jar of honey and gave it to Lion.
Then Lion said to Sheep, "Is it possible to get the skin?" Sheep replied, "I think it is possible my king." When Hyena heard this he was afraid of dying, and ran. Lion ran after him.
"If such is life in the bush, then it is better for me to return home," said Sheep.
Once there was a very hungry crocodile.
He searched for food slowly and quietly.
POW! The crocodile strikes!
After that he is no longer hungry,  and he is happy.
Until he gets hungry again.
Ape meets Crocodile by the lake.
"Where do you live?" asks Ape,  "In the lake," says Crocodile.
"Where do you live?" asks Crocodile. "In the trees," says Ape.
"Can you swim?" asks Crocodile.
"I cannot swim," says Ape. "I can teach you."
"We are friends. Do not be afraid," says Crocodile.
"Ape,  my uncle is sick. He needs meat," says Crocodile.
Ape is very afraid. Will Crocodile eat her?
Ape wants to escape from Crocodile.
Ape has an idea.
"I will give you my heart for him," Ape promises.
"My heart is in a tree on the land," says Ape.
"Will you fetch your heart?" asks Crocodile. "Yes," says Ape.
Crocodile swims back to the land. Ape runs to the trees.
"You are not my friend. You lied!" says Crocodile.
"We are not friends. You want to eat me!" says Ape.
In a village, there was a young boy whose name was Abula. He did not like to read or even to open a book. He was a lazy pupil. He behaved badly.
Abula stole his mother's money to buy sweets. Even when she hid her money, he found it and took it.After eating all his sweets, Abula would play with his friends.
After a while, Abula stopped going to school. He stayed out playing the whole day, only returning home in the evening. Abula's mother noticed this and became worried.
"Our son is not behaving well. I do not think he is attending school. He is also stealing money from me," said Abula's mother.
He said to his wife, "Next time, hide the money within the pages of a book. He never even opens a book, so the money will be safe there."
The next day, Abula looked for his mother's money. He searched everywhere but he did not find anything. He decided to go to the nearest market to find some money.
His father saw where Abula was going. "My son, I know why you are going to the market. Now go back inside and look in the books for money," he said.
Abula was puzzled, but he went and searched in the books. He found the money that his mother had hidden.
The next day, he looked in the books again. But there was nothing hidden there. He went to his father to ask why there was no money in the books.
His father smiled and replied, "My son, do you want to get enough money to buy many sweets?"  Abula answered, "Of course, father."
His father said, "Listen to me carefully. Read your books and attend your classes. You will find rewards in books. Do not give up." "But father, reading is a difficult activity. Books are boring!" Abula replied.
For a while, Abula's father was quiet. He thought about how to encourage his son. Then he said to Abula, "Let us read together. I will help you to find the wealth in books."
My little brother sleeps late. I wake early,  because I am great!
I am the one who lets in the sun.
"You're my morning star," says Ma.
I wash myself every day,  I don't need any help.
I don't mind cold water, or the blue soap that washes clothes.
Ma reminds,  "Don't forget your teeth." I reply,  "Never,  not me!"
After washing,  I greet Grandpa and Auntie. I wish them a good day.
Then I dress myself.  "I'm big now, Ma," I say.
I can close my buttons and buckle my shoes.
I make sure my brother knows all the school news.
In class I do my best in every way.
I do all these good things every day. But the thing I like most,  is to play and play!
zama is getting ready for school.
Papa is preparing porridge﻿.
He wished he would get porride from mmother
Porridge will give him energy
Here you go.
He adds milk in the porridge.
He finished his porridge quickly
Finish it quickly
there was a lot left
they added salt into the porridge
OH, papa give him too much porridge
WDad, when will mom come home? asked zama
There was a time when all the animals lived together as friends. One day they decided to have a meeting to elect a king.
Rooster wanted to be king. So he lied to the other animals. He told them, “The red comb on my head is fire! Don't touch the comb on my head!”
The other animals believed Rooster. They decided to elect Rooster as their king. The animals hoped that Rooster's fire would help them in cold weather.
Then came a day when it rained. And rained. And rained. It was cold. Everything was wet and cold.
“Where can we get fire to warm our bodies?” Rabbit asked the other animals.
“We can get fire from the comb on Rooster's head,” replied Monkey. “Rooster is our king because he has fire on his head,” said Monkey.
The animals agreed with Monkey. They sent Fox to collect fire from king Rooster.
Fox found Rooster in a deep sleep. So he decided to take fire without asking Rooster.
Fox collected some dry grass. He put the grass next to the comb on Rooster's head. Nothing happened. The grass did not catch fire.
“Wake up king Rooster!” yelled Fox. “We need fire now.”
But Rooster could not give fire to Fox.
Fox was angry. He went back to the other animals. He told them the truth about the comb on Rooster's head. From that day, no one was afraid of Rooster. And foxes eat roosters and their families.
Once upon a time, there lived two sisters, Nelima and Nambuya. Their parents were dead. They lived on bare land. There was neither rain nor crops. Whoever wanted food had to go a long distance to find it.
Nelima was a humble, quiet and helpful girl. Her sister Nambuya was proud and did not listen to advice. She did not care about other people.
One day, the two sisters had nothing to eat. They would have to look for food. So Nelima and Nambuya went off in different directions.
Meanwhile, there lived an old woman called Netasile. She was believed to be a giver of riches. Netasile had leprosy and her body was full of sores.
Nambuya came across Netasile. Netasile called the Nambuya, "My daughter, how are you? Where do you come from? Where are you going?"
Nambuya answered all the questions. Then the Netasile said, "Come help me to go to my house and I will tell you what to do."
Nambuya was rude to the woman. She said, "I would rather die than touch those sores of yours." Netasile kept quiet and wished Nambuya a safe journey.
Nambuya walked for a long time. She reached a place where there were snakes, millipedes, caterpillars and other insects. She was very tired and weak from hunger. When she sat down to rest, she fell asleep. The insects began to bite her.
On her journey, Nelima came to the same old woman. She was happy to see Netasile, who was the first person she met since starting her journey. Netasile asked the same questions as she asked Nambuya.
Nelima agreed to help Netasile. "You have done what others failed to do," said the old woman. She told Nelima to go back home. There she would find everything she wanted.
Nelima was very grateful and thanked the old woman. She ran back home and found a new house with everything in it, and a lot of food. She was now rich.
But Nelima mourned the loss of her sister, Nambuya. She said to herself, "One who did not listen to advice ended up in an elephant's mouth."
Ammu did not have a puppy.But she told everyone in school that she did.
"My puppy’s name is Simba," she told Venu."Simba eats bananas," she told Abdul."Simba is black," she told Kumari."Simba plays ball with me," she told Unni.
So Venu, Abdul, Kumari, and Unni told Ammu that they would come home.To see Simba. Ammu shook her head."You can’t," she said.
"Why?" they asked."Because Simba is scared of crowds," said Ammu."Then we’ll play with him one by one," said Kumari.
"You can’t," Ammu said."Why?" asked Unni."Because we’re going out today," said Ammu.
"Then we’ll come tomorrow," said Abdul."We’ll bring bananas for him," said Venu."We’ll play with him one by one," said Kumari."Okay," said Ammu.  She didn’t know what else to say.
That evening, Ammu asked Achan if he would buy a puppy for her."We’ll see," said Achan."But it’s urgent," said Ammu. Achan laughed. Ammu didn’t eat dinner. She felt sick.
She didn’t want to think about tomorrow.  In the morning, Amma said, "You look ill."She touched Ammu’s forehead. A fever!
"Stay at home today," Amma said.So Ammu skipped school.She lay in bed all day. She didn’t smile at all.All she ate was a slice of bread.
In the evening, Venu, Abdul, Kumari, and Unni came home."Why didn’t you come to school today?" asked Unni."I am sick," said Ammu.
"We saw Simba," said Abdul."Where?" asked Ammu."In the garden," said Kumari.
"He didn’t want to play ball," said Abdul.Suddenly, Ammu got up from bed. She ran outside.
It was true. There was a puppy in her garden. Simba!"But he’s not black," said Venu. "He’s brown.’""Oh," said Ammu. "I made that up!"
"He’s not afraid of crowds," said Abdul."Oh," said Ammu. "I made that up!"
"He doesn’t like playing ball," said Unni."Oh," said Ammu. "I made that up!"
"But he loves bananas," said Kumari."I told you, didn’t I?" smiled Ammu happily.
a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing. The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish. They didn't saw any fish bigger than this! Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM! They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
In a particular year, the dry season was too long and a drought hit hard. As a result, all the rivers dried up, except the River of Blessings. All the animals were thirsty and called for a meeting.
Camel was the first to speak, "As you know, we are very thirsty and all the rivers have dried up, except the River of Blessings. But it is very far away. What do we do?"
Horse suggested, "Some of us can go to the River of Blessings. We can drink and bring water for the others." Cow answered, "It is too far. By the time we returned from the river those left behind would be dead."
Sheep said, "Maa! Maaa! I will go to the River of Blessings and drink water." Goat jumped up and said, "Meee, meee! I will also go to the River of Blessings." Chicken said, "Keer, ker ker ker! I too will go to the River of Blessings.
All the animals wanted to go. Camel led the way. Going there was not easy. Guinea fowl was last in the line. "My friends, I can no longer go to the River of Blessings," he said.Chicken swallowed Guinea fowl.
They continued. Chicken said, "Please, I am tired, I no longer want to go to the River of Blessings." Sheep swallowed Chicken.
As the journey continued, Sheep also became tired. Sheep said, "I am tired. I do not want to go to the River of Blessings anymore." Goat swallowed Sheep.
Soon, Goat was too tired to continue going to the river. Horse turned and swallowed Goat. When Horse became too tired to go to the river, Cow swallowed him.
When Cow finally could not continue, Camel turned and swallowed her.
Being the only animal left, Camel did her best to reach the River of Blessings. Camel finally arrived, very tired.
On arrival, Camel lay down and vomited Cow. Cow vomited Horse. Horse vomited Goat. Goat vomited Sheep. Sheep vomited Chicken and Chicken vomited Guinea fowl.
And that is how all the animals managed to drink water from the River of Blessings.
My sister's dress is too big for me!
My brother's jersey is also too big for me.
My bag is big. But not too big!
This old belt is too small for me.
This is my doll's hat.
My socks are the right size.But the wrong colour!
These are my new shoes.
They fit me very well.
Look at the animals.
The cow says, "Moo."
The goat says, "Meh,  meh."
The horse says, "Neigh."
The pig says, "Grunt."
The chicken says, "Cluck."
The dog says, "Woof."
The farmer says, "Shhh!"
His hoe* was too short.* Long gardening tool.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was tooshort.
His bicycle was short too.
This man was too tall!
He made a hoe with a very long handle.
He made very tall  door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for there happily.
Long time ago, animals had no legs. They all used to crawl.
Only people had legs, which Maguru gave to them.
One day, Maguru decided to give legs to every animal. He wanted them to walk. He told them about it.
The animals said, "It will be very nice to have legs." They sang and danced.
The animals said it was hard to crawl.They felt pain.
When the day came, many animals went to Maguru's house. Giraffes, lions, elephants, rabbits, crocodiles and birds stood in a line.
Each animal was given four legs. Birds were given two legs each.
Everything was different after they got legs. Some danced for joy.Others fell down.
They went to show people.The animals said, "We will never crawl again."
The last one in the line was Millipede. Maguru asked, "Is thereanyone else after you?"Millipede answered, "No, I am the last one."
Maguru thought, "He is the last one. What will I do with the rest of the legs?" Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.
Millipede was very happy. He said, "I will move faster than others."
After Millipede left, Snake came to Maguru's house. He said to Maguru, "Please give me some legs."
Maguru said, "I have given out all the legs.Where were you?" Snake answered, "I overslept."
Maguru looked to see if there were legs remaining.He did not find any.
Maguru said to Snake,"Sorry, There are no legs left." Snake crawled home without legs. From that day, Snake does not sleep much. He is waiting to be first in line to get legs.
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
When I talk to her, she also talks to me.
In the morning, my friend will go back into the mirror.
But I don't mind at all. We will play again in my dreams!
Last week I received a lot of letters.
On Monday my doctor wrote a letter to my teacher.
Thabisile is sick. She must stay at home.
On Tuesday I got a letter from my class.
Get well soon Thabisile!
On Wednesday I got a letter from my best friend.
I drew this picture for you. Love from Dudu.
On Thursday I got a letter from my mother.
There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."
But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!
Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."
Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"
Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."
"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."
Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."
So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.
The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."
The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dusty car.
Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." "My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.
From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. And he tried his best not to get angry with her.Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided it wasn't worth the price to get angry and break things.
Sara has a canoe to cross the river.
Some women want to go across.
Some men want to go across.
They have a bicycle too.
Some animals want to go across.
They all get in the canoe.
The elephant wants to go across.
Everyone falls in!
The elephant is sad.
Sara takes the women across.
She takes the men across.
She takes the animals across.
The elephant has to walk!
Cow, Goat, and Dog went to town in a taxi. They were going shopping.
Cow bought a TV.
Goat bought a blanket.
Dog wanted to buy new shoes. But he did not have enough money.
The three friends went home in a taxi.
Did you see Cow standing in a field doing nothing? It is because she is thinking about her TV.
Did you see Goat running away from cars? It is because he is worried that someone might steal his blanket.
Did you see Dog running towards cars? Now he has enough money to buy his shoes. He wants to go to town.
Do you ever feel like your clothes aren't quite right......that they're all too big or too small or too tight?
Something is wrong with the buttons on this shirt.And these pants are so tight that they're starting to hurt.
This skirt is much too long for me.And this top is too tight! Do you agree?
My pants are too old. They need to be stitched.And these golden stars are making me itch.
I think I'll try on these trousers instead. But they pull and tug and are hard to put on.What will I do? All my options are gone!
How about this dress? No, I think it's too bright.What about my brother's stripy t-shirt? That would be a funny sight!
Or how about my daddy's jacket? No, I think they would be much too long. I 'll try on my mother's scarf instead. Oh no, I've put it on all wrong!I can't reach anything else on the washing line.So I'll have to find something else of mine.
These clothes seem to say, "We don’t want to agree"But an idea is beginning to come to me.
I'll mix and match to create my own style......so that finally I can relax and smile!
The rains did not come. The land was very dry.
This monkey left home to look for water and food.
She walked over hills and valleys.
She came to a place named Tirkol.
Monkey was very happy in this place.
She ate fruit and got fat. But she missed her friends.
So Monkey made the long journey home.
The other monkeys were joyful to see her.
"Where is this wonderful place with fruit?" they asked her.
"I will take you there," said Monkey.
The other monkeys loved Tirkol. They decided to stay there forever.
But the monkeys from Tirkol were worried.
"These new monkeys will eat all our fruit," they said.
The Tirkol monkeys went to attack the new monkeys.
"Why fight?" asked an elder. "There is enough fruit for all!"
This was true. So the monkeys decided to live together peacefully.
There was Little Goat and Little Leopard. They became friends.
They went to a field together to play.
They returned home very late.
Little Goat said to his mama,  "I met a beautiful friend. I am so happy. We will meet again tomorrow."
Mama Goat answered,  "Oh my child. I am glad you are back safely. He is not our friend. Do not meet him tomorrow."
At the same time,  Little Leopard told his mother,  "I met a beautiful friend. I am happy. We will meet tomorrow."
Mama Leopard answered,  "Oh my son,  I am sorry you did not eat Little Goat. When you meet him tomorrow,  kill him and eat him."
The next day,  Little Leopard went to the Little Goat's village.
Little Goat was not outside. He was hiding inside with his mother.
Little Leopard shouted,  "Let us go to the field to play."
Little Goat said,  "We are not friends anymore. I listen to my mama. Good children listen to their mamas."
Little Leopard was sad. He went back to his mama.
One day, Ngô-Iwa, the dog found eggs at the river.
Ngô-Iwa stole the ten eggs and put them in her bag.
Ngô-Iwa kept the eggs warm. She wanted them to hatch.
Crocodile asked Ngô-Iwa, "Have you seen my eggs?"
When Ngô-Iwa denied, Crocodile asked all animals about her eggs.
Meanwhile,  the eggs hatched one by one when Ngô-Iwa went hunting.
Ngô-Iwa could not give the young crocodiles enough food.
One day, Crocodile heard the young crocodiles crying for food!
Crocodile entered the hut and hit Ngô-Iwa with her tail.
Ngô-Iwa ran out through the window. Crocodile chased her.
Ngô-Iwa stopped and begged, "I am sorry!"
Crocodile forgave her and took her children to the river.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
Abebe was in his first year of school.His father was a farmer. One year, Abebe's father planted teff in his field. Every day after school, Abebe went to the field to help his father.
Next to the teff field was a football field. One afternoon while Abebe was chasing birds, four English boys came to play soccer.The boys began to play. The ball bounced up and landed in the teff field.
The ball damaged some teff. One of the boys ran into the field to get the ball, and he damaged more teff!They continued to play. The ball bounced and landed on the crop again and again.
The boys kept running into the field to fetch the ball. Each time they damaged some of the teff.Abebe and his father became more and more angry about the destruction of their crop.
Abebe's father said, "Son, use what you have learned in school. Tell them to stop kicking the ball into our field!"At that time, Abebe had only learned the English letters A, B, C, D, E, F.
Abebe wanted to shout at the boys. But he did not know the words in English.The ball came bouncing into the teff field again. One of the boys came running after the ball, into the field.
Abebe ran towards the boy, waving his arms. He started shouting. He shouted as loudly and clearly as he could, "A, B, C, D, E, F!" He shouted three times, "A, B, C, D, E, F!"
The English boy stopped running through the teff. His friends in the soccer field also stood still and watched Abebe. Then they spoke to each other in English and began to smile. They understood what Abebe was communicating.
He said, "Oh, my son, you're a brave and clever boy!" He was proud of his son.Abebe was also surprised and pleased. He did not know what to say.
Abebe's father encouraged him to work hard at school, and to continue with his studies after school.Abebe studied three languages and knew them very well. He became a successful translator and writer.
The small bus stop in my village was busy with people and overloaded buses. On the ground were even more things to load. Touts were shouting the names where the buses were going.
"City! City! Going west!" I heard a tout shouting. That was the bus I needed to catch.
The city bus was almost full,  but more people were still pushing to get on. Some packed their luggage under the bus. Others put their things on the racks inside.
New passengers clutched their tickets as they looked for somewhere to sit in the crowded bus. Women with young children made them comfortable for the long journey.
I squeezed in next to a window. The person sitting next to me was holding tightly to a green plastic bag. He wore old sandals,  a worn out coat,  and he looked nervous.
I looked outside the bus and realised that I was leaving my village,  the place where I had grown up. I was going to the big city.
The loading was completed and all passengers were seated. Hawkers still pushed their way into the bus to sell their goods to the passengers. Each one was shouting the names of what was available for sale. The words sounded funny to me.
A few passengers bought drinks,  others bought small snacks and began to chew. Those who did not have any money,  like me,  just watched.
These activities were interrupted by the hooting of the bus,  a sign that we were ready to leave. The tout yelled at the hawkers to get out.
The hawkers pushed each other to make their way out of the bus. Some gave back change to the travelers. Others made last minute attempts to sell more.
As the bus left the bus stop,  I stared out of the window. I wondered if I would ever go back to my village again.
As the journey progressed,  the inside of the bus got very hot. I closed my eyes,  hoping to sleep.
But my mind drifted back home. Will my mother be safe? Will my rabbits fetch any money? Will my brother remember to water my tree seedlings?
On the way,  I memorised the name of the place where my uncle lived in the big city. I was still mumbling it when I fell asleep.
Nine hours later,  I woke up with loud banging and calling for passengers going back to my village. I grabbed my small bag and jumped out of the bus.
The return bus was filling up quickly. Soon it would make its way back east.  The most important thing for me now,  was to start looking for my uncle's house.
“I can’t lift you up, Shanu!” says Ammi. “You are too big!”
“You can’t walk to school alone, Shanu!” says Abbu. “You are too small!”
“You can’t sleep in the baby’s cot, Shanu!” says Dadu. “You are too big!”
“You can’t carry the baby to the park, Shanu!” says Dadi. “You are too small!”
Shanu is puzzled. Too big! Too small! How can she be too big andtoo small all at once?
Too big to wear her old pink frock.Too small to make dosas at the stove.
Too big to climb up on Dadu’s back?Too smallto carry the baby on hers?
“What am I the right size for?” Shanu wonders.
“You are just big enough to take me for my morning walks,” says Dadu.
“And you are just small enough for me to tell stories to,” says Dadi.
“And you will always, always be the perfect size...for this!" all say, and give her a warm, wonderful hug.
Once upon a time, there was a hungry jackal. He was walking around the bush looking for food.
He came across a grapevine. He spotted a bunch of juicy ripe grapes hanging from a high branch.
"Those look really delicious," he thought. He took a few steps back so that he could make his highest jump.
The grapes were too high. Jackal fell on his back without even touching the bunch.
Jackal got up and went further back from his starting spot. He ran, and almost got high enough. But he fell even harder.
He tried again and again. But he couldn't get to the grapes. He kept falling until his back was very sore.
Finally, he gave up and walked away.
He stopped and looked back at the grapes. He was hungrier than ever. "Those grapes look really sour anyway," he thought.
Musau lived with his father, Syonzola.
Syonzola went to drink alcohol every day.
Syonzola came home drunk. He called, "Help! A hyena is killing me."
The people came running. But, there was no hyena.
Syonzola did this every night.
Every time Syonzola shouted, Musau woke up.
One night, a hyena waited for Syonzola.
Syonzola cried, "Help!" People said, "We are tired. He is tricking us."
Musau waited. His father did not arrive.
"My father is really in danger," Musau said.
Musau ran outside.
"Father! Father!" Musau called. The hyena was pulling his father's leg.
From that day, Syonzola changed. He began telling stories to children.
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
There was a spider called Anansi. Anansi was too lazy to cook his own food. Instead, he used to visit his friends and eat the delicious food they had cooked.
One day, Anansi was passing Rabbit's house when he smelled green vegetables cooking. He was very excited. Rabbit said to Anansi, “They're not quite ready yet. You can help me to wash up while we wait.” Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. I'll come back later.”
“How will I call you when they're ready?” asked Rabbit. Anansi thought for a minute. “I'll spin a web,” he said. “I'll tie one end around my leg and one end to your pot. When the greens are ready, pull on the web string. I'll come right away.” So Anansi tied the web to the pot, and walked on.
Anansi saw Monkey and his wife, cooking beans in a large pot. “Come and join us! The beans are nearly ready.” Monkey said. Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the beans are ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
As Anansi walked by Warthog's house, he smelled sweet potatoes. Warthog told Anansi, “My pot is full of sweet potatoes and honey! Come and share my food with me. Take this fork and help me to stir it.” Anansi replied, “I'll come back later. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the sweet potatoes areready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
By the time Anansi arrived at the river, each of his eight legs was tied to a pot of delicious food. Then, Anansi felt a pull on one of his legs. “Rabbit's food is ready!” Anansi thought, licking his lips.
He felt a second pull. And a third. And a fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth pull. Everyone was pulling on the web strings at the same time! “Stop! Stop!” he cried in pain, as his legs were stretched thinner and thinner. But no one could hear him.
Finally, the web strings could hold no longer. They snapped, one by one. Anansi rolled into the river to soothe his painful legs. But his legs would not return to their normal shape. Anansi was too embarrassed to go to any of his friends that day.
This is Khalai. She is seven years old. Her name means 'the good one.'
Khalai wakes up and talks to the orange tree. "Please orange tree, grow big and give us lots of ripe oranges."
Khalai walks to school. On the way,  she talks to the grass. "Please grass,  grow greener and don't dry up."
Khalai sees flowers. "Please flowers,  keep blooming so I can put you in my hair."
Khalai talks to the tree at her school. "Please tree,  put out big branches so we can read under your shade."
Khalai talks to the hedge round her school. "Please,  grow strong and protect us from bad people."
When Khalai returns home,  she visits the orange tree. "Are your oranges ripe yet?" Khalai asks the tree.
"The oranges are still green," sighs Khalai.  "I will see you tomorrow orange tree," says Khalai. "Perhaps then,  you will have a ripe orange for me!"
Why is the sky blue?
It is not always blue. Is it?
Why are leaves green?
They are not always green. Are they?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow. Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is blood red?
There is iron in the blood. That makes it red.
Why is salt white?
I don't know!
She is called Ms. Phone. Look at her!
She has five cellphones. When she wakes up, she arranges her mobile phones on the table.
The yellow one is for communicating with family.
The white one is for communicating with people at work.
The red one is for communicating with those who owe her something.
The pink one is for communicating with her best friends.
The purple one is for communicating with people who need her help.
Ms Phone likes people to be happy. She does not like fighting.
She lets the children watch television at her shop.
She visits the sick and the elderly in their homes.
When she passes by, people shout out, "Ms Phone! Ms Phone!"
Then she feels happy and says, "I am Ms. Phone. Here,  look at my phones!" That is Ms. Phone and her five mobile phones.
I peel the potatoes.
I chop a cabbage.
I grate the carrots.
I wash the beans.
I cut the butternut.
I chop the spinach.
My mom chops the onions.
Onions make me cry when they are chopped.
Goat, Dog and Cow were great friends.One day they went on a journey in a taxi.
They reached the end of their journey.The driver asked them to pay their fares.Cow paid her fare.
Dog paid extra, because he did not have the correct money.
The driver was about to give Dog his change.Suddenly Goat ran away without paying.
The driver was very annoyed.He drove away without giving Dog his change.
That is why, even today, Dog runs towards a car to peep inside.He is looking for the driver who owes him change.
Goat runs away from the sound of a car.She is afraid she will be arrested for not paying her fare.
Cow is not bothered by cars.Cow takes her time crossing the road.She knows she paid her fare in full.
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. “Why do you have a long neck?” she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. “Why does your horn have a sharp point?”
She was curious about Hippo. “Why do you have red eyes?” she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. “What does Crocodile eat for dinner?” she asked.
﻿“Never ask a question like that!” said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to baby elephant.“Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner,” squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
“Hello,” said a stone near the river bank.“Hello,” said Baby Elephant. “Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?” she asked.
“Bend down and I will tell you,” said the stone. “Lower, lower,” said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, “Snap!” Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws.“Crocodile will eat you for dinner!” squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, “Thud!” she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
Elephant is thirsty.He is happy to have the whole pond to himself.
Two giraffes are thirsty too.Will they fight over the water?
Three buffaloes want to drink water.Will they let the four birds also drink some water?
Five antelopes need some water.Can five antelopes and six warthogs drink water from the same source?
Will the seven zebras be let to drink water as well?Let's wait and see.
Frogs and fish swim in the same water.Humans can swim alongside frogs and fish.They can all drink water from the same source.
The lion roars when he arrives at the river.Can the lion, the elephant, buffaloes, the giraffe, warthogs, antelopes and birds all drink water together?
The elephant and the lion can drink water from the same river.Where does your water come from?Who do you share the water with?
My name is Simo.
Meet my new friends.
Zizo,  Lele,  Sisa and Ayanda.
Zizo loves football.
Lele loves to swim.
Sisa loves to play hide and seek.
Ayanda loves reading.
I enjoy everything my friends love.
I will play football with Zizo.
Sometimes I swim with Lele.
Or even play hide and seek with Sisa.
Come on,  make new friends and have fun.
Play football together.
Swim together.
Play hide and seek together.
Or even read together.
Selemeng loves cats. There are many cats at her house.
Selemeng has one black cat. This cat eats a lot of meat.
Selemeng has one fat cat. This cat eats everything.
Cat number three, runs up a tree. This cat gets stuck in the tree.
Selemeng climbs the tree. She gets stuck with cat three. Selemeng's mother has to help them get down.
Selemeng has two lazy cats. They lie outside in the sun all day.
Selemeng has three busy cats. They catch rats in the kitchen at night.
Selemeng has one dog. His name is Lirafi. Lirafi has no friends. He is sad.
Selemeng's cats do not like Lirafi. They chase him out of the house. Lirafi runs away.
Selemeng finds Lirafi and brings him home. The cats are not happy. They do not want to see Lirafi again.
How many cats does Selemeng have? She has eight cats.
How many dogs does Selemeng have? She has one dog. Where is Lirafi now?
It was a little girl who first saw the mysterious shape in the distance.
As the shape moved closer, the girl saw that it was a heavily pregnant woman.
Shy but brave, the little girl moved nearer to the woman. "We must keep her with us," the little girl's people decided. "We'll keep her and her child safe."
The child was soon on its way. Everyone wanted to help. "Push!" "Bring blankets!" "Water!" "Puuuuussssshhh!"
But when they saw the baby, everyone jumped back in shock. "A donkey!"
Everyone began to argue. "We said we would keep mother and child safe, and that's what we'll do," said some. "But they will bring us bad luck!" said others.
And so the woman found herself alone again. She wondered what to do with this awkward child. She wondered what to do with herself.
But finally she had to accept that he was her child and she was his mother. Now, if the child had stayed that same, small size, everything might have been different.
But the donkey child grew and grew until he could no longer fit on his mother's back. And no matter how hard he tried, he could not behave like a human being. His mother was often tired and frustrated. Sometimes she made him do work meant for animals.
Confusion and anger built up inside Donkey. He couldn't do this and he couldn't do that. He couldn't be like this and he couldn't be like that. He became so angry that, one day, he kicked his mother to the ground.
Donkey was filled with shame. He ran away as far and as fast as he could.
By the time he stopped running, it was night, and Donkey was lost. "Hee haw?" he whispered to the darkness. "Hee Haw?" it echoed back. He was all alone. Curling himself into a tight ball, he fell into a deep and troubled sleep.
Donkey woke up to find a strange old man staring down at him. He looked into the old man's eyes and started to feel a twinkle of hope.
Donkey went to stay with the old man, who taught him many different ways to survive. Donkey listened and learned, and so did the old man. They helped each other, and they laughed together.
One morning, the old man asked Donkey to carry him to the top of a mountain.
High up amongst the clouds they fell asleep. Donkey dreamed that his mother was sick and calling to him.
When Donkey woke up, the clouds had disappeared along with his friend, the old man.
Donkey finally knew what to do.
Donkey found his mother, alone and mourning her lost child. They stared at each other for a long time. And then hugged each other very hard.
The donkey child and his mother have grown together and found many ways of living together. Slowly,  all around them, other families have started to settle.
Anansi the Spider, and Rabbit were friends. They lived in a peaceful village in the mountains. Rabbit owned a big farm with lots of vegetables and fruit. Even though Rabbit shared generously with his friend, Anansi was unhappy and jealous.
So Anansi thought of a clever plan to take over Rabbit's farm. Soon Rabbit was left poor and homeless. Anansi was the proud owner of all Rabbit's land, vegetables, and fruit.
Anansi went to the market to sell his fruit and vegetables. He made so much money that he filled a big basket with it! With some of the money, he bought maize for his family, and put it on top of the money in the basket.
Anansi happily headed home with his basket on his head, singing. He was thinking about all the things he was going to buy with his money.
On the way, it started to drizzle. Soon the drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. Anansi the Spider left his basket on the side of the road to shelter under a tree. But from there he kept a close watch on his precious basket.
It started to rain even more heavily, and Anansi was getting cold and wet. So he ran into a hole. "I will stay in this hole until the rain stops," said Anansi to himself. "At least my money is protected by the maize I put on top of it."
A little while later, Vulture was flying around and spotted the basket on the side of the road. He saw that there was money and maize in the basket. So he covered the basket with his wings and waited for the rain to stop.
Anansi saw Vulture sitting on his basket. "Oh thank you, my friend, for protecting my basket," he said to the Vulture. "Excuse me, Anansi, did I hear you right?" asked Vulture. "Your basket? This basket is mine! I found it here on the road side!" Anansi could not believe his ears! "It's mine, I tell you!"
Furious, Anansi went and reported the theft to the chief. But Vulture said to the chief and his elders, "How could anyone leave a basket full of money and maize unguarded on the road?" "But I was watching my basket," said Anansi. "It's my money and my maize!" "I was looking after the basket when you came and said it was yours!" replied Vulture.
When the chief and his elders had listened carefully to both sides, they sent Anansi and Vulture away. They discussed the story for a long time. Eventually they reached a decision.
They summoned Anansi and the Vulture again. "We believe Vulture's story," they said. "He is not the thief. You were trying to claim something that was not yours." Anansi could not believe his ears! He burst into tears.
The news soon spread that the judgement had gone against Anansi. As he walked away, he heard Rabbit laughing and laughing. Rabbit went back to his farm and grew fruit and vegetables. But Anansi was poor again, with no friends.
Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boy wearing a beautiful shirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like the one that boy has," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt for Hamisi!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
Long ago, animals had no legs.
Maguru had given legs only to people.
Maguru decided to give legs to every animal.
The animals wanted legs to walk and run.
It was hard for them to crawl.
When the day came, different animals crawled to Maguru's house.
Maguru gave legs to animals and birds.
Some animals danced, while others fell down.
They said, "We will never crawl again."
Millipede was the last animal on the line.
Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.
Millipede said happily, “I will move faster than others.”
After Millipede, Snake came begging, “Please give me some legs.”
Snake said to Maguru, "I over-slept."
Maguru did not find any legs for Snake.
From that day, Snake still waits to get legs.
There lived a girl called Kalabushe. She talked a lot.
One day, Kalabushe’s aunt fell ill.
That evening, Kalabushe took food to her sick aunt.
Kalabushe met a hyena who had changed into a person.
Kalabushe told him, “I am carrying meat, eggs and milk.”
The hyena licked his lips as he thought about meat.
The hyena ran ahead of Kalabushe to her aunt’s house.
He swallowed Kalabushe’s aunt. He covered himself with her blanket.
Kalabushe arrived and called out, “Aunt, where are you?”
Kalabushe saw someone covered with a big blanket.
Kalabushe asked, “Aunt, why are your ears so big today?”
“Aunt, why are your eyes so big?”
“Aunt, why is your mouth big?” The hyena swallowed her!
Kalabushe kept asking questions while inside the hyena’s stomach.
He became tired of Kalabushe’s questions. He spat her out.
Kalabushe and her aunt were rescued by the villagers.
When Simbegwire's mother died,  she was very sad. Simbegwire's father did his best to take care of his daughter. Slowly,  they learned to feel happy again,  without Simbegwire's mother. Every morning they sat and talked about the day ahead. Every evening they made dinner together. After they washed the dishes,  Simbegwire's father helped her with homework.
One day,  Simbegwire's father came home later than usual. "Where are you my child?" he called. Simbegwire ran to her father. She stopped still when she saw that he was holding a woman's hand. "I want you to meet someone special,  my child. This is Anita," he said smiling.
"Hello Simbegwire,  your father told me a lot about you," said Anita. But she did not smile or take the girl's hand. Simbegwire's father was happy and excited. He talked about the three of them living together,  and how good their life would be. "My child,  I hope you will accept Anita as your mother," he said.
Simbegwire's life changed. She no longer had time to sit with her father in the mornings. Anita gave her so many household chores that she was too tired to do her school work in the evenings. She went straight to bed after dinner. Her only comfort was the colourful blanket her mother gave her. Simbegwire's father did not seem to notice that his daughter was unhappy.
After a few months,  Simbegwire's father told them that he would be away from home for a while. "I have to travel for my job," he said. "But I know you will look after each other." Simbegwire's face fell,  but her father did not notice. Anita did not say anything. She was not happy either.
Things got worse for Simbegwire. If she didn't finish her chores,  or she complained,  Anita hit her. And at dinner,  the woman ate most of the food,  leaving Simbegwire with only a few scraps. Each night Simbegwire cried herself to sleep,  hugging her mother's blanket.
One morning,  Simbegwire was late getting out of bed. "You lazy girl!" Anita shouted. She pulled Simbegwire out of bed. The precious blanket caught on a nail,  and tore in two.
Simbegwire was very upset. She decided to run away from home. She took the pieces of her mother's blanket,  packed some food,  and left the house. She followed the road her father had taken.
When it came to evening,  she climbed a tall tree near a stream and made a bed for herself in the branches. As she went to sleep,  she sang: Maama,  maama,  maama,  you left me. You left me and never came back. Father doesn't love me anymore. Mother,  when are you coming back? You left me.
The next morning,  Simbegwire sang the song again. When the women came to wash their clothes at the stream,  they heard the sad song coming from the tall tree. They thought it was only the wind rustling the leaves,  and carried on with their work. But one of the women listened very carefully to the song.
This woman looked up into the tree. When she saw the girl and the pieces of colourful blanket,  she cried,  "Simbegwire,  my brother's child!" The other women stopped washing and helped Simbegwire to climb down from the tree. Her aunt hugged the little girl and tried to comfort her.
Simbegwire's aunt took the child to her own house. She gave Simbegwire warm food,  and tucked her in bed with her mother's blanket. That night,  Simbegwire cried as she went to sleep. But they were tears of relief. She knew her aunt would look after her.
When Simbegwire's father returned home,  he found her room empty. "What happened,  Anita?" he asked with a heavy heart. The woman explained that Simbegwire had run away. "I wanted her to respect me," she said. "But perhaps I was too strict." Simbegwire's father left the house and went in the direction of the stream. He continued to his sister's village to find out if she has seen Simbegwire.
Simbegwire was playing with her cousins when she saw her father from far away. She was scared he might be angry,  so she ran inside the house to hide. But her father went to her and said,  "Simbegwire,  you have found a perfect mother for yourself. One who loves you and understands you. I am proud of you and I love you." They agreed that Simbegwire would stay with her aunt as long as she wanted to.
Her father visited her every day. Eventually,  he came with Anita. She reached out for Simbegwire's hand. "I'm so sorry little one,  I was wrong," she cried. "Will you let me try again?" Simbegwire looked at her father and his worried face. Then she stepped forward slowly and put her arms around Anita.
The next week,  Anita invited Simbegwire,  with her cousins and aunt,  to the house for a meal. What a feast! Anita prepared all of Simbegwire's favourite foods,  and everyone ate until they were full. Then the children played while the adults talked. Simbegwire felt happy and brave. She decided that soon,  very soon,  she would return home to live with her father and her stepmother.
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night. Because they were made of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! He melted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose, he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn,  and no tail.
It is fat,  with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze,  this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow,  what would you do?
Abebe was in his first year of school. His father was a farmer. One year, Abebe's father planted teff in his field. Every day after school, Abebe went to the field to help his father.
Next to the teff field was a football field. One afternoon while Abebe was chasing birds, four English boys came to play soccer. The boys began to play. The ball bounced up and landed in the teff field.
The ball damaged some teff. One of the boys ran into the field to get the ball, and he damaged more teff! They continued to play. The ball bounced and landed on the crop again and again.
The boys kept running into the field to fetch the ball. Each time they damaged some of the teff. Abebe and his father became more and more angry about the destruction of their crop.Neither Abebe nor his father could speak English. They didn't know how to say to the boys, "Don't come into this field. Stop damaging our crops!" The English boys didn't know any other language except English.
Abebe's father said, "Son, use what you have learned in school. Tell them to stopkicking the ball into our field!" At that time, Abebe had only learned the English lettersA, B, C, D, E, F.
Abebe wanted to shout at the boys. But he did not know the words in English. The ball came bouncing into the teff field again. One of the boys came running after the ball, into the field.
Abebe ran towards the boy, waving his arms. He started shouting. He shouted as loudly and clearly as he could, "A, B, C, D, E, F!" He shouted three times, "A, B, C, D, E, F!"
The English boy stopped running through the teff. His friends in the soccer field also stood still and watched Abebe. Then they spoke to each other in English and began to smile. They understood what Abebe was communicating.The boy with the ball walked carefully through the teff. Then the four English boys went to play away from the teff field. Abebe's father was surprised. He believed that his son had spoken English.
He said, "Oh, my son, you're a brave and clever boy!" He was proud of his son. Abebe was also surprised and pleased. He did not know what to say.
Abebe's father encouraged him to work hard at school, and to continue with his studies after school. Abebe studied three languages and knew them very well. He became a successful translator and writer.
Where is my cat?
Is it under the bed?
Is it on top of the cupboard?
Is it behind the couch?
Is it next to the bin?
Is it inside the basket?
Is it outside the house?
Here it is!
Tingi lived with his grandmother.
He used to look after the cows with her.
One day the soldiers came.
They took the cows away.
Tingi and his grandmother ran away.
They hid in the bush until night.
Then the soldiers came back.
Grandmother hid Tingi under the leaves.
One of the soldiers put his foot right on him,  but he kept quiet.
When it was safe,  Tingi and his grandmother came out.
They crept home very quietly.
Fana and her family live in a busy town.
Fana has a cat, two hens, a goat and a dove.
One day, Fana saw other children throwing stones at doves.
Fana ran towards the children. She shouted, “Stop throwing stones.”
Fana took the two doves home to look after them.
She fed them and told her family how she saved them.
Fana and her parents took the doves to the clinic.
Fana tells her friends, “Animals are our friends. We protect them.”
Long ago, there was a clever cat and a foolish dog. The clever cat lived well in a wealthy family's house. The foolish dog starved on the street.
"How is it that a wealthy family allows you to live in their house?" the foolish dog angrily asked the clever cat.
The clever cat replied, "I live with people because I'm neat and I bury my waste. I ask for food saying, meow."
"If I do the same, will they allow me to live in a house?" asked the dog. The cat replied, "Yes, do what I have told you and they will allow you. They will give you food."
The foolish dog said, "Today, I will not hurt you." "He almost got me this time. I don't want to meet him again," said the cat, jumping away.
Based on the cat's advice, the foolish dog barked loudly at the door of a house.
The owners of the house beat him with a stick. "The cat fooled me. I will eat her when I get her," shouted the foolish dog.
While the cat was playing outside her house, the dog grabbed her. He said, "Last time you fooled me. You told me to bark at the gate of a house. The owners beat me. Now I will eat you."
"Listen dog, you can eat me, but let me play a little first. Just as I allow a rat to play before I eat her," replied the clever cat.
The dog asked, "How does the rat play?" The cat replied, "I let it go a little, and I tell it to count to three. While the rat is counting, I grab it."
The foolish dog let the cat go free and told her to count to three. The clever cat escaped and climbed up a tree. "Come down from the tree and count to three," asked the dog.
The clever cat answered, "Listen dog, you will never get me again. I'm not a fool. You can count to a hundred, a thousand or a million but you will never get me again!"
My name is Simo.
I have four friends.
Their names are Zizo, Lele, Sisa and Ayanda.
My friend Zizo likes to play soccer.
My friend Lele likes to swim.
My friend Sisa likes to play hide-and-seek.
My friend Ayanda likes to read.
Me? I like to do the things they like to do.
I play soccer with Zizo.
I swim with Lele.
I play hide-and-seek with Sisa.
Come, friend, what do you like?
Come, play soccer with us.
Come, swim with us.
Come, play hide-and-seek with us.
Come, read with us!
Sipho goes to town with his sister.
His sister is looking at the clothes in shops. Sipho is bored.
Sipho sees something he likes.
The shoes are on sale.
He tries them all on.
His sister buys him soccer shoes.
Why are they in such a hurry to get home?
Luckily he got to the soccer field on time! He is wearing his new soccer shoes.
Hello everybody my name is Tammy the turtle, in this story I go through many trials to find my mother. It all began on one sunny afternoon, I was resting on marina beach . Mama said she would be away only for a few minutes but 5 hours have passed by since she left, just at that moment i felt a chill run run down my spine as i saw my sister being carried away by a large bird. After an hour or so I decided to search for mama.I had to go deep in the sea to look for mama. I crawled to the shallow part and began my journey. I was afraid at first but then slowly began to think that it was really fun.
On the way i met an angelfish. hello, what is your name? have you seen my mother? hello my name is misty and I'm sorry but I haven't seen your mother , but I'm  sure you will find her.If you don't mind , could you please accompany me to my school of fish. My name is marina and I  would love to accompany you. THANK YOU !!!!!!!!! marina. That's no problem , now come along. We soon reached the school of fish and I  dropped of misty.  I stopped to rest for some time and soon continued my journey.
on the way I fell back on a light coral which pushed me towards a sharp one , in the process i wounded my leg and I started to bleed. then a mermaid papered out of nowhere , without me saying a word she took out one of her pearly fins and covered my wound with,and without me noticing soon disappeared. The magic fin had stopped the bleeding and had healed the wound . I decided to take a cat nap . after about 10 minutes I thought I heard my mothers voice, at first I thought I was dreaming but when i opened my eyes i was surprised to see my mother right in front of me. She then said , " My dear daughter you have gone through so many trials to find me , now i know how much you love me"
I peel the potatoes.
I chop a cabbage.
I grate the carrots.
I wash the beans.
I cut the butternut.
I chop the spinach.
My mom chops the onions.
Onions make me cry when they are chopped.
There lived a beautiful girl. One day she was very hungry. She thought of ways of getting something to eat.
She met a man who asked her, "How are you young girl? What makes you sad?" The girl answered, "I am hungry."
The man was sorry for the girl. He told her there was a feast in the neighbourhood and she should go and steal food. The girl had never stolen before.
The girl stood up quickly and went to the home that was holding the feast.
When she got near, she forgot the instructions on how to steal. She sang repeatedly:I have come to steal food, f-o-o-d,I am walking slowly, slo-wly
People heard the song of the girl from far until she got into the homestead.
People were amazed by the nature of the song and asked her, "Where do you come from? What do you want? Why are you singing?"
The girl told them how hungry she was and they gave her food.Later, she was advised that stealing is bad!
These people are disagreeing with each other.
"Teachers are most important. You need us to learn," says teacher.
"Builders are most important. You need houses," says builder.
"Carpenters are most important. You need furniture," says carpenter.
"Doctors are most important. You need us to get well."
"Farmers are most important. You need us for food."
"Students are most important!" says the student.
"Because you were all students first!" Now everyone agrees.
Long, long ago there was a king called Kayanja. He lived in a palace with his queen and their daughter, Princess Apenyo. Princess Apenyo was such a beautiful young woman that every man wanted to marry her. But king Kayanja demanded a very high bride price for the princess.
Near king Kayanja's palace lived a chief called Aludah the Great. He was called "the Great" because everybody in the neighbourhood obeyed him, and he was very violent to anyone who disobeyed him! Chief Aludah's wife had recently died of malaria, and he wanted another wife.
So the fat old chief went to king Kayanja to offer bride wealth for the young princess. While the two men were discussing the price, the maid Kakembo overheard their conversation. Maid Kakembo was very close to princess Apenyo.
Chief Aludah agreed to give half of his wealth to king Kayanja, including a needle, which was also part of the bride price. Preparations were made in secret for the wedding between chief Aludah and princess Apenyo. The king knew that his daughter would not be happy with this decision.
One week before the royal wedding day, maid Kakembo approached Apenyo. "My dear Princess,  your father has organised your wedding with chief Aludah, and it will take place in one week."
Princess Apenyo was shocked and at first didn't know what to do. Then she thought, "I will never marry chief Aludah, that fat old man. Never! I must hurry to Trevor and see what he can do before it's too late." Trevor was princess Apenyo's boyfriend.
That night Apenyo crept out of the palace. If her father discovered where she was going he would be very angry. She ran through the thick, dark forest over rocks and shrubs. When finally she arrived at Trevor's house she was tired and thirsty.
"My love, why have you run all this long distance alone and at such a time of night?" asked Trevor. He fetched water for her and allowed her to rest. Trevor could not settle down while he waited for Apenyo to talk.
"My dear princess, what is the problem?" asked Trevor. Apenyo breathed heavily and said sadly, "My father wants to marry me off to chief Aludah the Great. But I can't marry that horrible man. Trevor, I want to marry you even if you are poor. I am ready to suffer. I love you."
"But princess, I have nothing to pay as your bride price, you know I'm a poor boy," cried Trevor. Apenyo replied, "I know, but it's only you I can get married to." She thought for a while and said, "Let's go to Kategga the boatman and ask him to take us across the river. That way we can escape and my father will never find us."
Back at the palace, king Kayanja had discovered princess Apenyo's disappearance. He ordered his subjects to search for her everywhere. The king's guards, soldiers, and everyone else searched, but they couldn't find the princess. They went back to the king and told him that Apenyo was nowhere to be seen. "Then go back and search again," King Kayanja ordered. He was very annoyed.
As Princess Apenyo and Trevor hurried to the riverbank, dark clouds began gathering in the sky. A heavy storm was coming.
Kategga the boatman was mooring his boat when the young couple approached him. Trevor asked Kategga to row them across the river. Kategga refused to accept, explaining that a heavy storm was fast approaching, and it would be too dangerous.
Trevor insisted and explained to Kategga why they must cross. He then put his hand deep in his pocket and took out a cowrie shell to give to Kategga. When Kategga heard their story and saw the beautiful shell, he felt sorry for them. He agreed to row them across the river in spite of the weather.
When King Kayanja and chief Aludah reached the bank, they saw the three people in the boat. They realised that the young lovers had escaped. Heavy winds rocked the boat and Kategga could no longer control it. King Kayanja shouted, "Apenyo, please come back! I forgive you. I will never punish you or Trevor."
But, it was too late. The boat tipped over and the three people were thrown into the wild water. They all drowned. After that day, everyone in king Kayanja's kingdom could marry anyone they wanted, rich or poor.
Two little hands to hold.
Two little feet to kick.
Two little eyes to see.
Two little ears to hear.
And two loving arms to HUG!
And two loving arms to HUG!
A bajaj is a three-wheeled vehicle. It is used in town to move fast from place to place.
In our community, driving is a male-dominated activity.  Females are usually not involved in it.
One day, Abebech asked her parents to give her money to take driving lessons. Her parents said to her, "This work is not good for girls. What would people say?"
However, Abebech said, "I have the ability to do anything other people do." She convinced them.  Her parents permitted her to start taking driving lessons.
Abebech successfully completed the training. Her parents discussed what to do next.
Afterwards they agreed to buy a bajaj for her. So, Abebech started to drive a bajaj on Debre Birhan roads.
One day Abebech had a great idea. She posted at the back of her bajaj a notice with her phone number on it.
The notice read, "I transport for free, pregnant women, mothers who have delivered, and children."Women and mothers whose children got sick all called Abebech.
Abebech earned money by transporting people. She continued to give free service to people who did not have money.
His hoe was too short.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was too short.
His bicycle was too short.
This man was too tall!
He made a very long hoe handle.
He made very high door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for many years.
In Miwa Forest, there lived a monkey who was always sad. This was because every time she had a baby, it died.
The pain of losing her babies made Monkey jump up and down. She would jump to one branch, then to another, and cry out, "Kwi! Kwi! Kwi!"
Monkey was sadder when she saw other monkeys with their babies.
The sad monkey sat on a branch. Days passed and she cried more and more.
Then she gave birth again. She decided to take the baby to the path.She wanted people passing by, to see the baby and wish it well.
Monkey put her baby on the path. At that time, a hunter was returning home. He saw the baby monkey lying on the side of the path.
The hunter carried the baby monkey to his house. When the hunter reached home, his three sons wanted to hold the baby monkey.
The boys sang: Throw it up! Throw it down! Throw it to me! Throw it to him! The baby monkey was thrown from one child to the other.
Mother Monkey hid in a tree and watched them. She was afraid that this baby would also die, like the others.
Then the hunter's wife saw her children playing with the little monkey. She said, "Be careful! Bring it here. You will drop it!"
She took the baby monkey in her arms, and blessed it.
The hunter's wife put the baby monkey down. Mother Monkey picked the baby up and disappeared into the forest. Mother Monkey never lost another baby from then on.
It is hot sunny Saturday morning on the farm. Maya, Duksie and Doobie are helping Mama K in her vegetable garden. The children work all morning. They dig compost into the soil. They weed and water. Then they harvest what is ripe and ready. Today each of the children will take home freshly picked strawberries, spinach and carrots.
Mama K always gives the children a treat for helping her. Sometimes its cake or chocolate, or she buys longsweets that look like snakes. Sometimes it's apples, pears or oranges. Mama K has only one rule. “Share it fair!” The children know they must share the treats equally, so they all get the same amount.
Today Mama K has baked a round strawberry cake with pink icing and berries from her garden. The childrenwait on the grass for their treat. “Here you go!” smiles Mama K. “But remember the rule. Everyone must get the same. Share it fair! Don't fight!”
Maya has the first turn to share the cake. She uses the knife to trace lines in the icing. The others watch her. She does not cut the cake yet. The others must first agree if her way is fair. “I think I will make two cuts down like this. Now we have three slices, all the same!” Maya shows them.
“No way!” says Duksie, “the one in the middle is much too big!” Doobie also shakes his head. Maya laughs and shrugs and tells Duksie to try.
“Here! Pass me the knife, I'll do it. Easy peasy!” chants Duksie. First she rubs out Maya's pattern in the icing and licks her fingers.
Then she makes one cut across and one down. “Look, I made my three slices!” “That's not fair!” shout Mayaand Doobie together.
“Share it fair! The pieces must be the same size and shape,” adds Doobie. “Why don't you try Doobie, SmartyPants?” smirks Duksie. “I bet you can't do it!”
“I wish the cake was a square or a rectangle, and then it would be easy!” says Doobie thoughtfully. “Or, if there were four of us to share the round cake that would also be easy,” says Maya.
And then! A picture comes into Doobie's head. He sees the sparkling silver badge at the front of his father's big red truck. On Sundays he helps his dad to wash the truck, and to polish the shiny badge. “I've got it! I've got it!I know how to do it,” yells Doobie.
“You are full of surprises, Doobie,” says Duksie sweetly. “How did you work it out?” Maya asks. Doobie smiles to himself. For now it his secret. Later, he will tell his dad.
First he uses a knife to smooth Duksie's lines in the icing. Then he traces three lines on the cake. It looksjust like the badge on his dad's truck, with three equal parts.
Just then Mama K comes out of her house. She is carrying a tray with three glasses of cold strawberry juice. “Look Mama K! Doobie found the way to cut the cake into three equal pieces,” Maya tells her. “Well done Doobie,three equal slices! You shared fairly, I'm proud of you all. Now cut the cake and drink your juice. It's time to go home. I will give you plates to take your pieces of cake.”
Maya cuts along Doobie's lines to make three equal slices. Just for fun, the children stack the slices on top of each other to check that they are the same size. Yes they are!
Doobie's dad arrives to pick up the children, and Doobie runs off to meet him. He can't wait to tell his dad how the badge on the truck helped him to solve a very tricky problem!
Zama is getting ready for school.
Dad is cooking porridge for breakfast. He mixes it with milk.
"Mummy has got the sweetest breast milk!" says Zama.
Milk has got fats, vitamins, calcium which gives Zama alot of energy for school.
The milk is ready.
Dad pours the milk,  with love.
"Dad,  I think this porridge needs more sugar and milk," says Zama.
"Mummy's milk tastes much better than Dad's milk," says Zama.
"Dad,  please in this milk asks Zama."
Dad adds sugar to Zama's milk.
"Wu! Dad! You added water in my milk!"
"Dad,  when will Mom be home?" asks Zama.
Once upon a time there lived two friends,  Tortoise and Snake.
On day Tortoise said to Snake,  "Let us go and swim." "Alright,  but I don't know to swim," answered Snake. "I will teach you," replied Tortoise.
They went to a swimming pool. "Who will enter the water first?" asked Tortoise. "You will,  and I will watch you," said Snake.
Tortoise entered the swimming pool. Snake observed from the steps.
After some time,  Snake entered the pool as Tortoise gave instructions.
Tortoise and Snake swam in the shallow end of the pool.
They started floating on the water.
As they were floating,  Tortoise started swimming backstroke. While imitating Tortoise,  Snake could not propel himself and started drowning.
On realising that Snake had disappeared,  Tortoise hurriedly went under water and rescued the life of the snake.
As soon as Tortoise got out of the water,  he turned Snake upside-down in order to get rid of the water that Snake swallowed.
Finally,  Tortoise used the mouth-to-mouth method to remove more water.
Today is Saturday. It is very hot.
Alice,  Arthur and Anabel want to swim in the river.
"Lets remove our clothes and go to swim",  says Anabel.
"We all jump and swim",  says Arthur.
"Oh come on! Let's swim, Swimming is fun!" says Alice.
The sun is going down,  we feel chilly. Where are our clothes?
Lets look for them. Under trees. In the bushes. Or everywhere.
Oh! A cow! What's that in her mouth? "My shirt",  cries Arthur.
Oh my God! Another one, "That's my skirt!"  shouted Alice.
My children, "What has happened to you?"
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. "Why do you have a long neck?" she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. "Why does your horn have a sharp point?"
She was curious about Hippo. "Why do you have red eyes?" she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. "What does Crocodile eat for dinner?" she asked.
"Never ask a question like that!" said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to Baby Elephant. "Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner," squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
"Hello," said a stone near the river bank. "Hello," said Baby Elephant. "Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?" she asked.
"Bend down and I will tell you," said the stone. "Lower, lower," said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, "Snap!" Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws. "Crocodile will eat you for dinner!" squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, "Thud!" she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
Kombe and Juma were poor neighbours. They did everything by themselves.
They wished they had a donkey. He would carry things for them.
Kombe said, “Let us buy a donkey together.” They were happy.
When Kombe's father died, Kombe inherited riches. He forgot Juma.
Kombe wanted donkey meat for his dogs. Juma needed the donkey for work.
The judge said, “Each of you can take half the donkey.”
Kombe killed the donkey. Juma carried things for himself once again.
Kombe wanted to burn his hut and build a new one.
Juma said, “Mine will burn too.” The judge agreed with Kombe.
Juma’s hut burned. The judge said, “Kombe burned only his hut.”
Juma had no donkey, no hut. He slept under the tree.
Juma worked hard. He had a good crop of peas.
Kombe’s boys ate most of the peas from Juma’s land.
The boys said, “Ask our father to pay for your peas.”
Juma said, “I don’t want your money. I want my peas.”
The judge told Juma, “Cut the boys open. Take your peas.”
Juma refused to listen. Kombe cried, “Let the elders decide.”
The elders told Kombe, "You killed the donkey. You burned his hut."
They said to Juma, "Killing Kombe's sons is wrong too."
Kombe gave Juma half of his property. They lived happily.
One day,  Rabbit was walking by the riverside.
Hippo was there too,  going for a stroll and eating some nice green grass.
Hippo didn't see that Rabbit was there and she accidentally stepped on Rabbit's foot. Rabbit started screaming at Hippo,  "You Hippo! Can't you see that you're stepping on my foot?"
Hippo apologised to Rabbit,  "I'm so sorry. I didn't see you. Please forgive me!" But Rabbit wouldn't listen and he shouted at Hippo,  "You did that on purpose! Someday,  you'll see! You're going to pay!"
Rabbit went to find Fire and said,  "Go,  burn Hippo when she comes out of the water to eat grass. She stepped on me!"  Fire answered,  "No problem,  Rabbit,  my friend. I'll do just what you ask."
Later,  Hippo was eating grass far from the river when,  "Whoosh!" Fire burst into flame. The flames began to burn Hippo's hair.
Hippo started to cry and ran for the water. All her hair was burned off by the fire. Hippo kept crying,  "My hair has burned in the fire! My hair is all gone! My beautiful hair!"
Rabbit was happy that Hippo's hair was burned. And to this day,  for fear of fire,  the hippo never goes far from the water.
This is Natabo. She has six brothers.
Her parents give her a small pot. She loves it.
One day her brothers break the pot.
Natabo cannot find her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away. She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Please come down," they ask.
Her brothers sing,  "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
One day, the hyena's son died.
A donkey heard the news. He ran to his relatives and said, "The hyena's son is dead." All the other donkeys said, "The hyena's son? That's good news. All the hyenas are our enemies."
One old donkey said, "Brothers, we must go to the hyena's funeral and show respect.""What? Go to the hyena's funeral?" The other donkeys said. "We don't want to go. We're frightened. The hyenas will eat us."
"Listen," said the old donkey. "If we don't go, the hyenas will be angry with us. They will have a reason to eat us.""You are right," said all the other donkeys. "We must go to the hyena's funeral. If we go, the hyenas will be happy with us. Perhaps they will become our friends."
The hyenas saw the donkeys outside their house."Why are the donkeys here? Have they come to laugh at us?" The hyenas wondered.The donkeys heard the hyenas. They were frightened and they began to sing.
This was the donkeys' song:Great hyenas, you hunt all night.  And we hear you sing in the cold moonlight.Your teeth are long. Your eyes are bright. Though your food is black, your dung is white.But now your son lies on his bed. And he is dead! Our lord is dead!
The dead hyena's uncle answered them with another song: Your song is good. Your words are sweet. Come in, dear donkeys. Take a seat!But what did you bring for us to eat? Hyenas are hungry. Hyenas want meat!
The donkeys were very frightened now."Let's run away," said one. "We can't. The hyenas will chase us," said another.
The oldest donkey said, "My lords, we came to show respect to you. We are sorry that your son is dead. We will pray to God to comfort you. Now we must go back to our home."
The donkeys began to go."Wait!" the hyenas said. "You cannot leave. You must give us something to eat. Cut off your lips and give them to us."
The donkeys looked at each other."If we give them our lips, perhaps they will let us go," they thought.
The hyenas cut off the donkeys' lips, and ate them.
Again, the donkeys tried to go.
"Stop!" Cried the dead hyena's uncle. "My brothers, will you let these donkeys go? Look at them! We can see their teeth! They are laughing at us!""They are laughing! They are laughing!" said all the hyenas.
They jumped on the donkeys. They killed them, and began to eat them.
Before the oldest donkey died, he looked at the hyenas and said, "Wicked hyenas, we came with our song to comfort you but we were wrong! Next time you are hungry, don't pretend that you need a reason to eat your friend!"
I like my teacher very much.
She is beautiful. She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She braided her hair pretty nice.
She placed colorful beads in her hair.
The beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, could you please braid my hair just like my teacher's?
When I grow older, I will also place colorful beads on my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie,  Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can see the huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing. "There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone,  I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes,  12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says. "I like counting in 4s," says Duksie,  "it's quicker."  "I'm going to count in 3s,  just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look,  there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did you pack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asks the children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side,  to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see,  how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself,  "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen and get a surprise for the children!"
Back at the farm,  Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them,  "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what it I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what she might bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of yellow apples falls onto the table. "See,  I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children,  "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. The count: 2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  and 1 apple left over, Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next,  they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted.  "Yay!" shout the children."
There was a time when all the animals lived together as friends. One day, they decided to have a meeting to elect a king.
Rooster wanted to be king. So he lied to the other animals. He told them, "The red comb on my head is fire! Don't touch the comb on my head!"
The other animals believed Rooster. They decided to elect Rooster as their king. The animals hoped that Rooster's fire would help them in cold weather.
Then came a day when it rained. And rained. And rained. It was cold. Everything was wet and cold.
"Where can we get fire to warm our bodies?" Rabbit asked the other animals.
"We can get fire from the comb on Rooster's head. Rooster is our king because he has fire on his head," said Monkey.
The animals agreed with Monkey. They sent Fox to collect fire from king Rooster.
Fox found Rooster in a deep sleep. So he decided to take fire without asking Rooster.
Fox collected some dry grass. He put the grass next to the comb on Rooster's head. Nothing happened. The grass did not catch fire.
"Wake up king Rooster!" yelled Fox. "We need fire now."
But Rooster could not give fire to Fox.Fox was angry.
Fox went back to the other animals. He told them the truth about the comb on Rooster's head. From that day, no one was afraid of Rooster.  And foxes eat roosters and their families.
This is Azizi. Azizi is my doll.
I like Azizi because he always smiles.
After I wake up I wash my face. Then I look for Azizi.
When I find Azizi I brush his hair.
When I eat breakfast I feed Azizi.
When I eat sweets I give one to Azizi.
But Azizi never eats his sweet. I wonder why!
I walk around the compound picking flowers.
I give a flower to Azizi. But he never says,  "Thank you."
I wash Azizi clean before my mother bathes me.
I dress Azizi in red because I love the colour red.
When I go to sleep,  I lay Azizi beside me.
In a tiny village of  Lumela, lives a little boy called Chipego.  Chipego lives with his father, mother and his  little sister Mutinta.  There is one more special member of the family, Pendo the cow. Chipego helps his father to look after Pendo in exchange for pocket money that he uses to buy books. Meet Chipego. He is 10 years old and in Grade 5 at the village school. Chipego always comes top of his class. "What's his secret?" his schoolmates ask themselves."He's excellent in reading and writing. How does he do it?" they wonder. Chipego tells them it is because he reads lots of books. While they waste their time doing nothing, he spends all his free time reading.
Chipego sometimes earns K80.00 a week in pocket money. He spends most of the pocket money on books at the second-hand book shop in his village.So how does Chipego earn enough pocket money for these books? Read on to find out.
Meet Pendo, the family's milking cow. She produces over 20 litres of milk per day. Chipego's father sells the milk.A cow needs food and water, and time to graze in the field. So each day after school, Chipego helps with this work. Chipego's father gives him pocket money for the work he does. And it is this money that Chipego saves to buy books each week.
First, Chipego gives Pendo a bunch of carrots. He gives her exactly eight carrots a day. Each day he picks the carrots from his father's vegetable garden, enough for a day at a time.You can work it out. You will find that Pendo eats nearly 60 carrots a week. Can you tell exactly how many?
After that, Chipego takes Pendo to graze in the fields. His father warned him to watch the time and give Pendo not  more than three quarters of an hour to graze.Pendo usually starts grazing at about14:15 hrs, so that Chipego can take her back to the milking shed at 15 hours. In winter when it gets dark earlier, Chipego may start grazing earlier, around 13:30 hrs.
Next Chipego gives Pendo water. Without water Pendo won't produce milk, no matter how much Chipego feeds her. Chipego fetches buckets of water from the village pump because there isn't one nearby.Pendo's trough holds about 30 litres of water. Chipego's bucket only holds 5 litres. So to fill the trough Chipego has to make many trips. Can you work out how many trips he has to make?
Then, Chipego takes Pendo to his father to get her daily 12 kg bag of grain. Chipego calculates that's almost 90 kg a week.Each bag costs K39.00. Chipego works out the cost of grain for each week. First he works out the cost of 7 bags at K40.00, which makes K280.00 Then he subtracts K7.00 to get K273.00 "That's over K1 000 a month!" Chipego estimates. Is he correct?
Chipego's father milks Pendo twice a day. She produces about 24 litres of milk a day, so about 12 litres for each milking.Sometimes Chipego helps with the milking but it is not as easy as it looks. "One day," he thinks to himself, "I will have my own cows and I will have to do all the milking myself."
His father pours the milk from the big bucket into smaller two litre cans or one litre bottles. He then sells the milk for K8.00 a litre.Once a week Chipego's father donates 25 litres of milk to Bulela School feeding scheme. Each child gets a quarter litre of this milk. That means that 100 children get milk on this day.
For each litre of milk sold, his father gives Chipego 50 ngwee. That doesn't sound like a lot, but if his father sells 24 litres a day, it adds up to quite a bit. Can you tell how much?Chipego saves his money until Saturday when he makes a trip to the book shop. Each book costs less than k10.00, so in a good week, he can buy quite a few.
Chipego also loves to drink Pendo's milk. His father says that milk helps to build strong bones and teeth and makes a person fit and healthy.So by drinking milk and eating lots of vegetables from his father's garden, Chipego is strong and healthy. He seldom gets sick and never goes hungry. His mother loves making mabisi using Pendo's milk too. His young sister enjoys adding the milk to her chibwantu! Hmmm! Yummy!
Chipego never forgets to thank Pendo at the end of each day. He rewards her with extra carrots or spinach leaves that he finds lying around the garden."Thank you Pendo, you are my best friend! It is thanks to you that I am strong, healthy and clever. If not for you I would never be able to buy all the books that help me be top of my class." One day I will be a veterinary  doctor because of you!Pendo is very lucky because Mutinta, Chipego's mother and Father also rewards her! What an amazing cow!
This is Jaaka the fisherman from Naminya.
He fishes on the river Nile.
He has a boat,  fishing net and a hook.
He always wakes up very early in the morning to catch the Nile perch.
At around 10am,  he's selling his catch in Jinja central market.
Jaaka what happened? Was it a loss? He's so sad.
"Today the situation is bad. The Nile breeze did not permit me to fish. And one perch swam away with my hook."
"But I have hope that tomorrow will be good,  because I've bought a new hook."
This is Cat. This is Dog.
Cat and Dog want to draw. Cat and Dog want to colour. Cat and Dog want to make art. Dog starts.He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a square.
First Dog draws an oval. The oval is the body of Cat.Wow, that is simple!
Then he draws two triangles on top of the oval.The two triangles are the ears of Cat and he draws a black triangle in the oval. The black triangle is the nose of Cat and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of Cat.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is easy!
Then he draws the mouth of Cat. The mouth is a line.It looks like the letter ‘w’ and he draws the hairs of Cat. Three hairs on the left side and three hairs on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Cat. The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Cat.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Cat. The tail is a long line.
At last he draws some stripes on the body of Cat and he colours the body orange. Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is beautiful!
Now it is Cat's turn. He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a rectangle.
First Cat draws an oval. The oval is the body of Dog.Wow, that is good!
Then he draws two black forms on top of the oval.The two black forms are the ears of Dog and he draws a black circle in the oval.The black circle is the nose of Dog and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of dog.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is perfect!
Then he draws the mouth of Dog. The mouth is a line. The shape is again the letter ‘w’ and he draws some dots around the mouth of Dog. Three on the left side and three on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Dog.The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Dog.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Dog.The tail looks like a flower.
At last he draws some black circles on the body of Dog and he colours the body yellow.Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is wonderful!
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye drawing of Cat.Bye bye Dog.Bye bye drawing of Dog.
I see fire again.
The fire is burning brightly.
The fire can cook meat and vegetables.
The fire can keep me warm.
The orange light of the fire gives me light when it is dark.
The fire crackles and pops.
Fire is powerful and can be dangerous.
We must be careful when lighting fires or playing with fire.
There was once an old woman living by herself inside a bottle. She complained all the time.
One day a fairy passed by her home and saw her looking very sad.
The fairy stopped and asked her, “What is the problem? Why are you so sad?”
“I am tired of living in a bottle,” replied the old lady.
The fairy said to her, “Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times.”
After doing what she was told to do, the old woman found herself in a small house.
After a few days the fairy came back and found the woman still unhappy.
The fairy asked her, “What is wrong now? Why are you sad?”
“This house is too small. I do not like it,” responded the old woman.
The fairy said to her, “Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times.”
After doing what she was told to do, the old woman found herself in a big house.
The fairy came to see the old woman again. She found her still unhappy and grumpy.
The fairy asked her, “What is wrong old lady?” The old lady responded, “This house is dark and dirty.”
The fairy said to her, “Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times.”
After doing what she was told to do, the old woman found herself back inside the bottle.
The old woman could not see the blessings she received. She ended up in her bottle, alone and unhappy.
Once upon a time,  Hen and Eagle were friends. They lived in peace with all the other birds. None of them could fly.
One day,  there was famine in the land. Eagle had to walk very far to find food. She came back very tired. "There must be an easier way to travel!" said Eagle.
After a good night's sleep,  Hen had a brilliant idea. She began collecting the fallen feathers from all their bird friends. "Let's sew them together on top of our own feathers," she said. "Perhaps that will make it easier to travel."
Eagle was the only one in the village with a needle,  so she started sewing first. She made herself a pair of beautiful wings and flew high above Hen. Hen borrowed the needle but she soon got tired of sewing. She left the needle on the cupboard and went into the kitchen to prepare food for her children.
But the other birds had seen Eagle flying away. They asked Hen to lend them the needle to make wings for themselves too. Soon there were birds flying all over the sky.
When the last bird returned the borrowed needle,  Hen was not there. So her children took the needle and started playing with it. When they got tired of the game,  they left the needle in the sand.
Later that afternoon,  Eagle returned. She asked for the needle to fix some feathers that had loosened on her journey. Hen looked on the cupboard. She looked in the kitchen. She looked in the yard. But the needle was nowhere to be found.
"Just give me a day," Hen begged Eagle. "Then you can fix your wing and fly away to get food again." "Just one more day," said Eagle. "If you can't find the needle,  you'll have to give me one of your chicks as payment."
When Eagle came the next day,  she found Hen scratching in the sand,  but no needle. So Eagle flew down very fast and caught one of the chicks. She carried it away. Forever after that,  whenever Eagle appears,  she finds Hen scratching in the sand for the needle.
As the shadow of Eagle's wing falls on the ground,  Hen warns her chicks. "Get out of the bare and dry land." And they respond: "We are not fools. We will run."
Lynne, Oupa Karel and Anton were getting things ready for Lynne's birthday party.
Anton and Lynne are going to bake a cake. Oupa Karel reads the recipe.
"Let's mix these ingredients in the big bowl," said Lynne.
Anton stirred the ingredients and made a big mess.
"The cake feels heavy now," said Oupa Karel.
"Your friends have arrived," said Oupa Karel.
Anton thought the first present would be heavy because it was big.
It was a pillow and it weighed very little.
Anton thought the next present would be light because it was small.
It was a painted rock and it weighed a lot.
The children said that 1 kilogram of rocks weighs the same as 1 kilogram of feathers.
Lynne's cake was burnt.
Lynne was very sad.
Auntie Mavis asked Anton to guess how much her present weighed.
"It weighs the same as the cake that burned," said Anton.
Everyone said, "happy birthday, Lynne."
Two thieves wanted to steal maize from a farmer's garden one night. They did not know about one another.
The first thief came and harvested a sack of maize.
The second thief entered the farmer's garden,  leaving his bicycle outside.
The two thieves bumped into one another in the maize field. They both cried out,  "Who are you?"
They both got a fright and ran away in opposite directions.
The first thief left behind his bag of maize.
The second thief left behind his bicycle.
When the farmer came he used the bicycle to carry the sack of maize.
My dinosaur and I look at my birds in the sky.
My birds and I meet Chimpanzee in the tree.
My chimpanzee and I play with my giraffes on the hill.
My giraffes and I make monkey balls from clay.
My monkey and I eat bananas with Gorilla every day.
My gorilla and monkey fear Tortoise in every way.
Tortoise and I go home very slowly with Snake.
Snake and I love to hiss and sing songs by the lake.
My entire family and I live together in great happiness!
Emeka lived in a fine house in Ebiba town. His parents were rich.  Emeka had a dog called Chita. He looked after Chita very well.
Every day, Emeka's father took him to school in his car. He also brought Emeka home after school.One afternoon on their way home, Emeka's father stopped to buy something at a big shop.
From the car, Emeka looked across the road and saw an old man. He was carrying a big load on his head. He was tired and walked slowly. Emeka kept looking at him.
The old man sat under the shade of a tree on the walkway and opened his bag. He had two flat plastic water bottles, which he was making into shoes.
Emeka thought about that old man for a long time. He felt sad. When he got home, he could not eat. He thought about what he could do.
He got up and took some money from his money bag. He called Chita and jumped on his bicycle. Emeka rode to the shop where his father had shopped.
The boy ran into the shop and came out with a bag. He went to where the old man was resting against a tree.Emeka called out, "Good afternoon, sir." The man answered, "Peace to you, my child."
Emeka asked, "Sir, where do you come from? The old man replied, "My child, hunger has chased me from my village. I am here to earn money."
Emeka gave his shopping bag to the old man. Tears filled the man's eyes as he took the sandals from the bag. He thanked Emeka from his heart.
"I must go now before mother starts looking for me," said EmekaThe old man waved to the boy and his dog as they went. "Bless you, my child," he said with a smile.
"Where were you?" mother asked Emeka as soon as he got home. She was worried.Emeka told her everything. She felt touched by his story.
Later, Emeka's father told him, "We are proud of what you did. But you must always tell us before you leave the house." Then he added, "Now, here is the money that you spent!"
Early one morning Vusi's granny called him, "Vusi,  please take this egg to your parents. They want to make a large cake for your sister's wedding."
On his way to his parents, Vusi met two boys picking fruit. One boy grabbed the egg from Vusi and shot it at a tree. The egg broke.
"What have you done?" cried Vusi. "That egg was for a cake. The cake was for my sister's wedding. What will my sister say if there is no wedding cake?"
The boys were sorry for teasing Vusi. "We can't help with the cake, but here is a walking stick for your sister," said one. Vusi continued on his journey.
Along the way he met two men building a house. "Can we use that strong stick?" asked one. But the stick was not strong enough for building, and it broke.
"What have you done?" cried Vusi. "That stick was a gift for my sister. The fruit pickers gave me the stick because they broke the egg for the cake. The cake was for my sister's wedding. Now there is no egg, no cake, and no gift. What will my sister say?"
The builders were sorry for breaking the stick. "We can't help with the cake, but here is some thatch for your sister," said one. And so Vusi continued on his journey.
Along the way, Vusi met a farmer and a cow. "What delicious thatch, can I have a nibble?" asked the cow. But the thatch was so tasty that the cow ate it all!
"What have you done?" cried Vusi. "That thatch was a gift for my sister. The builders gave me the thatch because they broke the stick from the fruit pickers. The fruit pickers gave me the stick because they broke the egg for my sister's cake. The cake was for my sister's wedding. Now there is no egg, no cake, and no gift. What will my sister say?"
The cow was sorry she was greedy. The farmer agreed that the cow could go with Vusi as a gift for his sister. And so Vusi carried on.
But the cow ran back to the farmer at supper time.  Vusi got lost on his journey. He arrived very late for his sister's wedding. The guests were already eating.
"What shall I do?" cried Vusi. "The cow that ran away was a gift, in return for the thatch the builders gave me. The builders gave me the thatch because they broke the stick from the fruit pickers. The fruit pickers gave me the stick because they broke the egg for the cake. The cake was for the wedding. Now there is no egg, no cake, and no gift."
Vusi's sister thought for a while, then she said, "Vusi my brother, I don't really care about gifts. I don't even care about the cake! We are all here together, I am happy. Now put on your smart clothes and let's celebrate this day!" And so, that's what Vusi did.
I saw a big truck driving down the road.
A car came driving up the road.
The truck driver was talking on his cellphone.
He was not looking at the road.
There was a big accident.
An ambulance and the police came to help.
Two tow trucks came. They towed the truck and the car.
I was shocked.
Long long ago people didn't know anything. They didn't know how to plant crops, or how to weave cloth,  or how to make iron tools. The god Nyame up in the sky had all the wisdom of the world. He kept it safe in a clay pot.
One day, Nyame decided that he would give the pot of wisdom to Anansi. Every time Anansi looked in the clay pot, he learned something new. It was so exciting!
Greedy Anansi thought, "I'll keep the pot safe at the top of a tall tree. Then I can have it all to myself!" He spun a long thread, wound it round the clay pot, and tied it to his stomach. He began to climb the tree. But it was hard climbing the tree with the pot bumping him in the knees all the time.
All the time Anansi's young son had been standing at the bottom of the tree watching. He said, "Wouldn't it be easier to climb if you tied the pot to your back instead?" Anansi tried tying the clay pot full of wisdom to his back, and it really was a lot easier.
In no time he reached the top of the tree. But then he stopped and thought, "I'm supposed to be the one with all the wisdom, and here my son was cleverer than me!" Anansi was so angry about this that he threw the clay pot down out of the tree.
It smashed into pieces on the ground. The wisdom was free for everyone to share. And that is how people learned to farm, to weave cloth, to make iron tools, and all the other things that people know how to do.
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means "daughter of the people of Kanyada." She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. "First open my gift," said Odongo. "No, my gift first!" said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar-Kanyada. She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them,  they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, "I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again."
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village.   Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
I woke up very early to get ready for school.
Mother was annoyed. I was too slow dressing up.
I ate my breakfast quickly.
I met my friends in school.
I opened my school bag. Oops! I still had mother's phone! I returned it in the bag.
It was time to go home. I looked into my school bag. Oops! Mother's phone was not in my school bag.
I started crying. The teacher asked, "What is the problem, Wanjiku?" I could not talk. I covered my face with my hand.
Finally, I said, "Mother's phone is lost." Teacher was surprised. We started looking for the phone.
I danced around in class. "Thank you teacher. Thank you teacher!"
I put mother's phone in my school bag. I said to myself,  "I will not play with mother's phone again."
Once there was a family who had a tree with such sweet fruit that everyone visited their compound to taste the fruit. The family also had a very beautiful daughter. Many people admired her dazzling beauty, white eyes and above all, her great personality.
When she grew up into a young woman, young and old men flocked to her home seeking her hand in marriage. Her parents decided that the man who could sit in the compound the whole day without eating any fruit would be given her hand in marriage.
The news spread all over the village. The first man to come was the head of all farmers in the village. He was handsome, rich and young. He was welcomed and served the fruit. He sat for a few minutes, but before long, he ate the fruit and was sent away.
The leader of animal keepers was next. He was handsome, young and rich. The girl admired him. But when he was served with the fruit, he immediately ate it, and was sent away.
The next man to come had many pieces of land. He was arrogant and ugly. The girl prayed that he would eat and go away. When served, he refused to eat. The time passed, and the girl started begging him to eat. By around four o'clock, he was overcome with hunger, and he ate. He, too, was sent away.
Next, the chief came around. He was arrogant, old,  and ugly. No one liked him in the village. The girl wished that he would eat and go away. When he was served with the fruit, he refused to eat. He stayed the whole day. At about six o'clock, he asked if he could use the toilet.
A few days later, a young, handsome, rich prince arrived. The girl looked at him in admiration. She took him aside, and begged him not to eat the fruit. She served him much less fruit than the other suitors. But by midday the prince had already eaten and was sent away. The girl burst into tears of anger and disappointment.
The next day, a farmer came around. He was poor and lazy, but he was young and popular among many people for being a great talker. He came determined to win. The girl served him many fruits and asked him to eat and go away.
Her parents had to hand over their daughter to the "lazy one." The girl begged to be saved from her fate, but her parents could do nothing. As the farmer took her home, he sang such a beautiful song while clapping his hands. Many people flocked to the road to see the couple.
Among the people were servants of the rich prince. They called the farmer aside, and offered him money and cattle if he would leave the girl. Without a moment's hesitation, he took the money and the cattle, and walked off.
The servants dressed the girl in fine clothes and took her to the palace, straight to the prince. Before long, her parents were called and a ceremony was organised to join the two in marriage.
Grandma's garden was wonderful. It was full of sorghum, millet, and cassava. But best of all were the bananas. Although Grandma had many grandchildren, I secretly knew that I was her favourite. She invited me often to her house. She also told me little secrets. But there was one secret she did not share with me. Where she ripened bananas.
One day I saw a big straw basket placed in the sun outside Grandma's house. When I asked what it was for, the only answer I got was, "It's my magic basket." Next to the basket, there were several banana leaves that Grandma turned from time to time. I was curious. "What are the leaves for, Grandma?" I asked. The only answer I got was, "They are my magic leaves."
It was so interesting watching Grandma, the bananas, the banana leaves and the big straw basket. But Grandma sent me off to my mother on an errand. "Grandma, please, let me watch as you prepare." "Don't be stubborn, child, do as you are told," she insisted. I took off running.
When I returned, Grandma was sitting outside but with neither the basket nor the bananas. "Grandma,  where is the basket, where are all the bananas, and where..." But the only answer I got was, "They are in my magic place." It was so disappointing!
Two days later, Grandma sent me to fetch her walking stick from her bedroom. As soon as I opened the door, I was welcomed by the strong smell of ripening bananas. In the inner room was grandma's big magic straw basket. It was well hidden by an old blanket. I lifted it and sniffed that glorious smell.
Grandma's voice startled me when she called, "What are you doing? Hurry up and bring me the stick." I hurried out with her walking stick. "What are you smiling about?" Grandma asked. Her question made me realise that I was still smiling at the discovery of her magic place.
The following day when Grandma came to visit my mother, I rushed to her house to check the bananas once more. There was a bunch of very ripe ones. I picked one and hid it in my dress. After covering the basket again, I went behind the house and quickly ate the banana. It was the sweetest banana I had ever tasted.
The following day, when Grandma was in the garden picking vegetables, I sneaked in and peered at the bananas. Nearly all were ripe. I couldn't help taking a bunch of four. As I tiptoed towards the door, I heard Grandma coughing outside. I just managed to hide the bananas under my dress and walked past her.
The following day was market day. Grandma woke up early. She always took ripe bananas and cassava to sell at the market. I did not hurry to visit her that day. But I could not avoid her for long.
Later that evening I was called by my mother and father, and Grandma. I knew why. That night as I lay down to sleep, I knew I could never steal again. Not from grandma, not from my parents, and certainly not from anyone else.
One day after a heavy rain, Iman looked across the sky and saw colours in it for the first time.
"How beautiful," she thought. Someone must have worked very hard, painting the sky with a brush like Daddy paints houses.
She ran to her sister and said, "Zarah look! Someone has painted the sky for us and made it beautiful."
But Zarah said, "No, silly. That is a rainbow. You are little and I am big. I know why it is in the sky. Let me show you."
Zarah took Iman to the zoo. She said, "Rainbows do not appear because lion cubs roar for the first time or because elephants are born."
She took Iman to a field of flowers and said, "They do not appear because butterflies lose their colours in the clouds."
She showed Iman a book. She said, "They do not even appear because rhinos run across the ground and scare colours up into the sky."
"I know why rainbows really appear. Mummy told me and now I'll tell you." Zarah took Iman's hand and led her to a playground.
"Rainbows appear in the sky because of children like you and me. One day, colours looked down from above and liked what they could see."
"They saw children with light skin, dark skin and everything in between. They thought, 'How wonderful it must be to be as beautiful as these.'"
"They came together in the sky and spoke about what they could do. They decided, 'If we are to be beautiful we must do it as a group.'"
"Now they join together and shine as brightly as they can. Hoping to be as beautiful as the children they see, just like you and me."
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
When I talk to her, she also talks to me.
In the morning, my friend will go back into the mirror.
But I don't mind at all. We will play again in my dreams!
Hare met Elephant carrying a pot of honey.
Elephant carried Hare on his back. Hare ate Elephant’s honey.
They found a big buffalo drinking water in a river.
Hare wanted to know who was stronger, Buffalo or Elephant.
Hare said he had an idea how to find out.
Hare tied one end of a rope around Elephant’s waist.
Hare tied the other end around Buffalo’s waist.
Hare hid in a tree and shouted, “Pull!”
Buffalo and Elephant pulled. Elephant pulled Buffalo.
Buffalo pulled Elephant. Neither could win.
Hare cut the rope, closer to Buffalo.Elephant fell over!
Hare praised Buffalo saying, “You are stronger.”
Once upon a time, there was a village called Izagodo. All the people in this village were very young. There was not a single old man or old woman in the village.
The young men and women of Izagodo danced and had fun. They ate what they liked and drank anything that made them drunk. They had fun all day and all night.Very soon, they forgot how to work.
They also forgot anything that happened the day before.The young men and women of Izagodo woke up one day and all the food was finished. There was not a drop of wine left. The musical instruments were all broken.
There was no music for dancing. But they couldn't even dance anymore because they were hungry and weak.They went to the compound of Oza, the village chief, and cried bitterly.
They cried and wailed.The young chief came out of his large hut and pleaded, "Stop! Dear people of Izagodo. Please stop crying. We might die soon, let us save our strength for a few more breaths."
The people shouted, "You are our chief! You must save us!"Chief Oza was quiet. Then after a while, he stood up and said, "I am no longer your chief. I shall leave this village and find somewhere peaceful. You can choose another chief."
So Oza went into his hut, packed his things, and left.The people did not know who would be their leader. They did not know what to do. They cried so much more.
Then a small but clear voice said, "I will be your chief!" Everybody turned to look for the owner of the voice. They all looked to each other. They looked and looked. But they could not tell who had spoken.
To the surprise of everyone, a little boy stepped out of the crowd. The boy said, "Yes! I will be chief. I can help you. But you must promise to stop having fun all day and all night. And you must follow my advice."
The young people were moved by the child's courage and promised to obey him.He took them away from the village, to a lush farm. They had food and rested. Then he taught them. He helped them to remember how to farm.
With the little boy as their chief, the people of Izagodo began a life of hard work. They worked and worked. Before long, they had more than enough to eat and drink. They were happy again and had fun. But also they continued to work.
Many nights the little chief would quietly leave the village, to meet with a wise old man.He told him moonlight tales, and stories of great men and women who solved the problems of their people. In time, the boy himself became a wise and powerful man.
A crocodile has sharp teeth.
A lion also has sharp teeth.
A shark has very sharp teeth!
A cow has strong teeth for grinding food.
A bird does not have teeth. How does it eat?
Rats have long front teeth.
I used to have front teeth.
My front teeth fell out!
Once upon a time,  there lived a man called Mairu in Bubaali Village. He liked to eat meat so much.
One day,  the chairman of Bubaali village invited all the villagers to his wedding that was to take place at his home.
Then Mairu also heard that there was another wedding in Nabuyanja village. "Ugh! Ugh! Ugh!Two parties on the same day!" Mairu imagined.
"Ha! Ha! Ha! I must attend both parties," he said. "I will first walk to Bubaali then come back to Nabuyanja."
Mairu woke up very early in the morning and walked to Bubaali village. He looked around and saw that the party had not yet started. "I will go back to Nabuyanja and return to Bubaali later," Mairu told himself. "Yes! Yes! I hope I will not be late."
Mairu walked gently back to Bubaali hoping to find the meat, rice, sodas and matooke ready. He was now very hungry. When he arrived,  men and women were still preparing the food.
"I left cooks at Bubaali preparing to cook," he thought. "The food must be ready now." Mairu decided to walk back to Nabuyanja under hot sunshine,  i will not loose hope he added!
Mairu arrived at the Bubaali party,  people had already eaten and cleaned the utensils. Guests were giving presents to the bride and the groom. Mairu was very disappointed. He looked displaced and every one became concerned. But his target was to eat enough.
He decided to walk back to Nabuyanja village. Because he was hungry and tired,  he could not walk fast any more.
When he arrived at Nabuyanja village,  the food was over and it was time for the bride and groom giving a speech.
Upon hearing that there was no food,  Mairu fell and fainted. He had missed meat from both parties. All he got was some posho and beans on a small plate yet his target was to eat meat.
Gently, he walked back home cursing never to serve two masters at ago.
I can run with it.
I can jump with it.
I can dance with it.
I can swim with it.
I can skip with it.
I can kick with it.
I can escape with it.
But I can never fly with it.
A long time ago,  three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly,  they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home,  Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But,  she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise,  a dog opened the door and said,  "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said,  "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said,  "Make the bed for me!" Nozibele answered,  "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed,  or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said,  "Nozibele,  today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house,  cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone,  Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed,  one behind the door,  and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back,  he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele,  where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here,  under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here,  behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here,  in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
Mother Sun decided to visit her sister, Moon. Sister Moon lives on the  other side of the sky. "I will be back soon," said Sun to the clouds.
When Sun left, the mountains put on their white scarves.
Wind had an argument with the trees. The trees became angry. They threw their leaves  all over the place.
The sky started to grumble. She turned grey.
The clouds were sad to see all this. They started crying. There were many tears.
The whole world began to sink under water.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the sky, Sun was ready to leave her sister. She kissed Moon goodbye and went home.
Sky was so happy to see Sun that she turned bright blue. The mountains put on their pretty green dresses.
The wind went to sleep. The trees stretched their branches and smiled.
The clouds were very happy to see mother Sun again. They went away to play.
Lots of little plants popped out of the earth to say, "Hello." The whole world sparkled.
Mother Sun shined her light everywhere. "I told you I would be back," she beamed.
Long time ago, Hare and Hyena were good friends.
Hare said to Hyena, “Let us do farming together.”
Hare suggested that they should plant maize and share duties.
Hare told Hyena, “My work of chasing birds is difficult.”
Hyena agreed to till the land alone.
When Hyena pulled out weeds, Hare sat down singing.
When the maize was ready, Hare enjoyed chasing birds away.
Hare said, “I harvest above the soil. You harvest below.”
Hare harvested all the maize and stored it.
Hyena found only roots under the soil.
Hyena realised that he was cheated. He was angry.
They planted potatoes. Hyena said, “I will harvest above the soil.”
They worked on the farm together, singing.
At harvest time, Hyena harvested only potato leaves.
Hare harvested a lot of big potatoes and stored them.
Hyena chased Hare to get revenge. Their friendship ended.
Andiswa watched the boys play soccer. She wished that she could join them. She asked the coach if she could practise with them.
The coach put his hands on his hips. "At this school,  only boys are allowed to play soccer," he said.
The boys told her to go and play netball. They said that netball is for girls and soccer is for boys. Andiswa was upset.
The next day, the school had a big soccer match. The coach was worried because his best player was sick and could not play.
Andiswa begged the coach, "Please, let me play." The coach was not sure what to do. Then he decided that Andiswa could join the team.
The game was tough. Nobody had scored a goal by half time.
During the second half of the match, Andiswa got the ball. She moved very fast towards the goal post. Andiswa kicked the ball hard and scored a goal.
The crowd went wild with joy. Since that day, girls were also allowed to play soccer at the school.
Sakima lived with his parents and his four year old sister. They lived on a rich man's land. Their grass-thatched hut was at the end of a row of trees.
When Sakima was three years old,  he fell sick and lost his sight. Sakima was a talented boy.
Sakima did many things that other six year old boys did not do. For example, he could sit with older members of the village and discuss important matters.
Sakima's parents  worked at the rich man's house. They left home early in the morning and returned late in the evening. Sakima was left with his little sister.
Sakima loved to sing songs. One day his mother asked him, "Where do you learn these songs from, Sakima?"
Sakima answered, "I just know them, mother. I hear them in my mind and then I sing."
Sakima liked to sing for his little sister, especially,  if she felt hungry. His sister would listen to him singing his favourite song. She would sway to the soothing tune.
"Can you sing it again and again, Sakima," his sister would beg him. Sakima would accept and sing it over and over again.
One evening when his parents returned home, they were very quiet. Sakima knew that there was something wrong.
"What is wrong, mother, father?" Sakima asked. Sakima learned that the rich man's son was missing. The man was very sad and lonely.
"I can sing for him. He might be happy again," Sakima told his parents. But his parents dismissed him. "He is very rich. You are only a blind boy. Do you think your song will help him?"
However,  Sakima did not give up. His little sister supported him. She said, "Sakima's songs soothe me when I am hungry. They will soothe the rich man too."
The following day, Sakima asked his little sister to lead him to the rich man's house.
He stood below a window and began to sing his favourite song. Slowly, the head of the rich man began to show through the window.
The workers stopped what they were doing. They listened to Sakima's beautiful song. But one man said,  "Nobody has been able to console the boss. Does this blind boy think he will console him?"
Sakima finished singing his song and turned to leave. But the rich man rushed out and said, "Please sing again."
At that very moment, two men came carrying someone on a stretcher. They had found the rich man's son beaten up and left on the side of the road.
The rich man was so happy to see his son again. He rewarded Sakima for consoling him. He took his son and Sakima to hospital to check if Sakima could see again.
One day, Anansi the spider picked up some yams in his garden. They were very beautiful and very good yams.He cooked them carefully on the fire. Then he sat down to eat them.
As Anansi was about to eat the first bite, he heard someone knock on the door. "Oh no !" Anansi thought. "Who could it be?" But he opened the door. It was Turtle who looked very tired. "Anansi, please let me in. I've walked so far today and I'm so tired and hungry," Turtle said. So what could Anansi do except let him in?
Anansi was too selfish to share his beautiful and good yams with anyone. So he came up with a nasty plan.As Turtle sat down at the table and started reaching out to grab some yams, Anansi shouted at him, "Turtle, your hands are all dirty! You can't eat with your hands all dirty! Go wash them."Turtle's hands were really dirty. So he crawled gently towards the river, washed his hands and then crawled back to the table.
But meanwhile, Anansi had started swallowing the yams. When Turtle returned, he saw that the yams were gone.Turtle looked at Anansi. "Thank you for inviting me to dinner. If you ever come near my house, come see me and let me make this dinner for you," he told him. And Turtle started crawling slowly towards his house.
After some time, Anansi began to think more and more about the free dinner promised by Turtle. So one day he went to visit.Anansi arrived at Turtle's house at dinner time as the sun was setting over the river. Turtle was lying on a rock in the sun, warming himself like turtles do.When Turtle saw Anansi, he said, "Hello, Anansi, did you come to eat with me?"And Anansi replied, "Yes, that would be very nice, thank you." He was getting hungrier and hungrier.
So Turtle dived to the bottom of the river to set the table for dinner and get everything ready. Anansi waited on the rocks on the bank.Soon Turtle came swimming back and said, "Oh Anansi, it's ready now, come have dinner with me."And Turtle dived again and started eating the green leaves prepared for dinner.
Anansi tried to dive to the bottom of the river, but it was a spider, not a turtle, and he couldn't dive that deep. He always came to the surface.He tried to jump into the river, he tried to dive, but nothing helped. He couldn't come down to eat that dinner.
Finally, Anansi had an idea. He put many stones in his coat pockets and was heavy enough to sink to the bottom of the river. How clever he was!He saw Turtle's table, full of juicy green leaves and lots of other delicious foods. Anansi's mouth was watering.
But just as Anansi grabbed some of that delicious food, Turtle stopped him. "Anansi, aren't you going to dinner with your coat on? We don't do that at home."Anansi, without thinking, replied, "Oh, of course you're right, Turtle, what was I thinking?" He took off his coat.
But without the stones in his pockets to hold him down, Anansi immediately rose to the surface of the river and found himself out of the water. Anansi sadly put her head in the water and watched Turtle eat all the delicious food!
Goat, Dog and Cow were great friends.One day they went on a journey in a taxi.
They reached the end of their journey.The driver asked them to pay their fares.Cow paid her fare.
Dog paid extra, because he did not have the correct money.
The driver was about to give Dog his change.Suddenly Goat ran away without paying.
The driver was very annoyed.He drove away without giving Dog his change.
That is why, even today, Dog runs towards a car to peep inside.He is looking for the driver who owes him change.
Goat runs away from the sound of a car.She is afraid she will be arrested for not paying her fare.
Cow is not bothered by cars.Cow takes her time crossing the road.She knows she paid her fare in full.
Once upon a time, there was a man called Byantaka who had a cow. Each day Byantaka grazed his cow. He also gave the cow water to drink. But Byantaka only had a very small pot for water.
So he went at his neighbour's home to borrow a bigger pot for water. His neighbour agreed to lend Byantaka his biggest clay pot saying, "My neighbour's problem is my problem."
After a few days, Byantaka went to apotter's place and bought a small pot. He took it home. He put the small pot inside the big pot that he had borrowed from his neighbour.
Then he put the big pot, with the small pot inside it,on his head. He carried the big pot to the neighbour who loaned him the pot.
Byantaka told him, "I am returning your pot, it has reproduced." The neighbour was amazed that his pot had produced another pot. He praised Byantaka saying, "Your home is blessed."
After a while, Byantaka went back to his neighbour to borrow the pot again. He did not have good intentions.
The owner of the big pot waited in vain for Byantaka to return his pot. Eventually he went to Byantaka's home and said, "I have come for my pot."
Byantaka told his neighbour, "My friend, our pot died. I was just on my way to tell you the bad news."
His neighbour clapped his hands together in surprise. His face began to swell with anger. He shouted at Byantaka, "I have never heard of a pot dying!"
Byantaka replied, "My friend you should accept these things. Everything that produces must die. I was also very sorry about the big pot's death."
His neighbour was very angry and he went to court to report Byantaka. The judge listened to explanations from both of them. He found the owner of the pot was in the wrong.
"When Byantaka told you that the pot had reproduced, you accepted. When he says that every living thing which reproduces must die, he is correct." That is how the judge judged the case.
Byantaka's neighbour went home walking like a snail. Byantaka had got the big pot with his cleverness.
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means “daughter of the people of Kanyada.” She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. “First open my gift,” said Odongo. “No, my gift first!” said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar­Kanyada.She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them, they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, “I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again.”
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village. Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
Sara has a canoe. Her canoe is big. It is by the riverside.
Some women come to the river. One woman has a basin of fruit. Another woman has a chicken. Another woman has a goat. Another woman has two goats. They ask Sara, "How can we get to the other side of the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!"
Then, some men arrive. One man has a fish. Another man has a bicycle. Another man has a sack of maize.
Another man has two sacks of maize. They ask Sara, "How can we get to the other side of the river?" Sara replies, "Get in my canoe!"
Some animals come to the river. They ask Sara, "How can we get across the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!"
The animals get in the canoe. The dog gets in the canoe. The cat gets in the canoe. The monkey gets in the canoe. The rabbit gets in the canoe. The turtle gets in the canoe. The gazelle gets in the canoe.
The elephant arrives at the river. He asks, "How can I get to the other side of the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!" The elephant gets in the canoe. The canoe fills up with water.
The canoe is too small. There isn't enough room.
Sara says, "Hold on! First I'll take the women."
Sara says, "Second, I'll take the men."
Sara says, "Finally, I'll take the animals."
The elephant says, "I'm just going to walk!"
There was a village near a lake.There lived a young girl. Her name was Atieno.
Atieno's father was a famous fisherman. He had his own little fishing canoe. Atieno enjoyed going fishing with her father.
Atieno loved to watch the boys play football. "Let me play with you," she begged them one day. The boys laughed at her, "Go and play hide and seek with girls. "
Girls said to Atieno, "Your legs are too long." Atieno was sad. Each morning, Atieno danced alone with the sun.The sun became her friend.
One day, the sun did not rise. Cocks did not crow. Birds did not sing. Children did not go to school. Even her father did not go fishing.Atieno was sad. "Where is my friend, the sun? Why is it so dark today?"
Atieno told the other children how sad she was. But they laughed at her, "Perhaps your friend the sun, is dead. Or perhaps it ran away from you."Atieno said, "The sun is my friend. It cannot die."
Atieno was so sad that she ran to the house. She kicked her brother's ball very hard.
Atieno thought, "I will play with this ball until my friend, the sun returns." She picked up the ball and ran out with it.
Atieno put the ball on the ground. She thought, "I can play just like those boys." She kicked the ball hard. It went up and up into the cloudy sky.
Everybody stared up. The ball disappeared into the thick clouds. There was total silence.
Suddenly, the thick clouds cleared. The sun appeared. Life returned to the village once again. Everybody prepared to do what they always did.
Atieno could not believe that the sun was back in the village. But most of all, the sun was back in her life. She told the children, "My friend, the sun is back!"
Kadogo and Juma are friends who love running. They run together every day.
One day they were reading maps at school. Juma said, "Let's run across our continent. Let's race, together with Africans from many countries!" "Let's go, we can doit! African unity!" cheered Kadogo.
They decided to carry a unity torch on their journey. They lit the torch and began to run. The race started at the southern tip of our continent, in Cape Town, South Africa.
From South Africa they headed along the west coast. They ran through Namibia, Angola, DRC, Congo and Cameroon. Runners quickly joined them from these countries. The growing group of people rested in Nigeria, in Abuja.
More runners from West Africa joined the friends as they passed through Nigeria.They continued together, following the River Niger.
A sandstorm in Mali made it difficult to run. Juma was the strongest of all of them. He led the way safely, holding the unity torch high.
At Guinea's coast in Conakry the dusty runners washed in the sea. Then they decided to race to Morocco through Senegal and Mauritania. All the way, more people joined them.
At Casablanca, the runners enjoyed playing on the beaches. They made more friends. Next, they set off across North Africa.
They ran through Algeria and Libya, and stopped in Egypt to visit the pyramids. Then they turned and headed east, following the River Nile toEast Africa.
They ran through deserts and national parks. More young people joined them in Kampala, Uganda. The group ran into Kenya, and headed for its coast and the cityof Mombasa.
When they reached the sea, they sat onthe beach and atecoconut rice with fish. Juma said, "Let's take the unity torch to Mount Kilimanjaro, in Tanzania."
But by this time, Juma was very tired. Just as they left Kenya, he fell down. The runners stopped the race. Everyone came tohelp Juma.
Juma passed on the torch to Kadogo. He said, "You can carry the torch to Mount Kilimanjaro. Let'slight a flame for African unity."
After lighting a unity flame high on Kilimanjaro, the group of runners headed into southern Africa. People cheered the runners saying, "You are our heroes.We are together!"
They stopped to swim in Lake Malawi, and rest before going to the next country. Kadogo said to Juma, "We've run from farthest point in southern Africa to the farthest point in North Africa. Now we are in the south again. Our journey is ending."
The unity runners finally carried the torch to Great Zimbabwe, the ancient city of that country. Crowds gathered at this important place, cheering to welcome the tired runners."We did it!" said Kadogo. "What a race!" smiled Juma.
Nda ay niina.
Ay ga ma suseeti fumbey haw.
Ay ga ma toori boosi kaaney haw.
Nda ay moyey.
Ay ga di baalu kaŋ go ga deesi hala beena ra.
Ay ga di maaje.
Nda ay mayo.
Ay ga ma ciiro kaŋ go teeku haro ga.
Ay ga ma leemu kaaniyo.
Nda ay kamba.
Ay ga ni kamba di.
There lived an old man called Hagos. He lived with his three sons.Hagos wanted his sons to have wealth after his death. He prepared three boxes for them.
Hagos went to his neighbour Haile and said, "I want my sons to have wealth. I have prepared three boxes. I want you to give them the boxes after I die."
After Hagos died, Haile called the sons together.He told them, "Your father gave me these boxes before he died. You will each find your name on one of them. Take yours please."
The sons took the boxes and opened them.The first box had gold in it. The second box had soil. The third box had animal dung in it.
The one who found gold was very happy. The other two were not happy. They started quarrelling with him.
"You are brothers, you should not quarrel. Let me take you to a wise old man to advise you," said Haile to the three brothers.
Haile took the brothers to the wise old man. "Good morning, we have come to ask advice about inheritance," said Haile to the old man.
Haile told the wise old man about the three boxes that Hagos had left for his sons."Now they are quarrelling because only one received gold," explained Haile.
The wise old man asserted, "Your father had a reason for giving each of you a particular box."
He continued, "The one who received gold, your father wants you to be a merchant. The one who received soil, your father wants you to be a farmer."
"The one who received animal dung, your father wants you to be a cowboy. Your father wanted you each to have his own profession," the old man concluded.
After they listened to the old man's advice the three brothers agreed. They worked in their professions and lived happily.
Un arc-en-ciel has seven colours.
The first colour is rouge.
Kewyu is wearing une chemise rouge.
The second couleur is orange.
This is une orange. What else can you see that is le couleur orange?
The third colour is jaune.
Le jaune of an egg is jaune. What else can you see that is jaune?
The fourth colour is vert.
Our jardin de bananes is vert.
The fifth colour is bleu.
The ciel is bleu.
The sixième couleur is indigo.
These berries are le couleur indigo.
The seventh couleur est violet.
Violet is my couleur préférée! What is your couleur préférée?
Do you know the seven colours of the rainbow in French?
One day, mama bought different fruits.
"When can we have some fruit?" we asked. "We will eat the fruit tonight," said mama.
My brother Rahim is greedy. He tasted all the fruit. He ate a lot of it.
"Look at what Rahim did!" shouted my little brother. "Rahim is naughty and selfish," I said.
Mama was angry with Rahim.
We were also angry with Rahim. But Rahim was not sorry.
"Are you going to punish Rahim?" asked little brother.
"Rahim, you will be sorry soon," warned mama.
Rahim started feeling unwell.
"My stomach is painful," whispered Rahim.
Mama knew why Rahim was sick. "The fruit is punishing Rahim," she thought.
Later, Rahim said sorry to us. "I will never be so greedy again," he promised. We believed him.
Many years ago, hyenas were starving. Because of a famine, even goats, sheep and cows migrated to other places. Hyenas had nothing to eat. They gathered in one place to discuss the issue.
One of the hyenas said, "In our culture, we eat anything that is fleeing. Look, these clouds are fleeing." This hyena believed that the clouds were migrating to another place. He said, "Let's eat them."
Immediately, all the hyenas looked up and saw the clouds moving in the sky. One of the youngest hyenas asked, "How do we reach the clouds? They are very far away from the ground."
The oldest hyena said, "Let the strongest hyena stand on the ground and then let the rest of us stand on each other's backs. We will climb on one another's backs until we reach the clouds."
They agreed and started climbing up on one another's backs. Soon, there were no more hyenas left remaining on the ground except the strongest one.
After the last hyena climbed up, the hyena on the ground thought that the others had started eating. He asked, "Why don't you give me some of the food you're eating?"
However, the hyenas did not reach the clouds. They didn't find any food and so they had nothing to give to the strongest hyena standing on the ground.
The strongest hyena became impatient and moved to the left side. All the others came falling down to the right side. As a result, even today all hyenas limp on their right side.
The wind roars. It roars past our home.
The wind is powerful. It tears my kite from my hand.
I run after my kite. The wind blows me away from the kite!
The wind becomes a storm. It carries my kite higher and higher.
The tornado swallows me up! I see nothing, I touch nothing.
Where is my kite now? Perhaps it is caught in a tree.
Perhaps my kite is still flying in the sky.
The wind finally dies down. I am still spinning.
When I stop spinning I look around. Where did the wind go?
I cannot see my kite anywhere. I cannot hear the wind anymore.
Perhaps tomorrow I will find my kite.
Now, I must go home, before the wind starts to roar again.
A crow was thirsty. He moved a very long distance in search for water for drinking but failed.
He then tried to fly back. To the tree where he was living. It took him a long time because he was weak.
As he was moving he saw water in a pot in someone's compound.
The water was almost at the bottom of the pot. His beak could not reach the water in the pot. He thought of a way to get that water.
An idea came to his mind. Hegot small stones He dropped one stone and the water in the pot jumped.
The crow put his mouth and drunk the water droplets.
He got another stone and repeated the exercise. He kept on doing this until he was satisfied.
This is cow. Cow is cool!
By day,  it is an ordinary cow.
Flying a kite.
Kicking a ball.
By night,  a supercow!
Saving lives.
And fighting crime.
But if you close your eyes really tight,  and make a wish.
Cow might come to visit you too!
The end.
In the olden days, Thunder and Lightning lived on earth amongst people.
Thunder was the mother of Lightning.
Lightning was hot tempered and he often got into arguments.
Whenever Lightning was angry he used to go around burning houses and knocking down trees.He made a frightening noise, "Pia-la-la-la, pia-la-la-la!" He damaged farms, and even sometimes killed people.
Whenever Lightning did these things, his mother would call out to him in a very loud voice, "Bumrambo- la-la-la, la-bum!" She tried to make him stop causing damage.
But Lightning did not care about what his mother said.He would cause problems for everyone when he was in a bad temper.
At last, people complained to the king.
So the king ordered that Thunder and her son should leave the village.He sent them to live far away from people's houses.
This did not do much good. When Lightning was angry he still burnt forests, "Pia-la-la-la, pia-la-la-la!" The flames sometimes spread to farms and burned them.
So people complained to the king again.
This time, the king told Lightning and Thunder that they could nolonger live on earth.He sent them to live in the sky, where they could not cause as much damage.
Ever since then, when Lightning is angry, he still manages to burn and destroy, "Pia-la-la-la, pia-lala- la!" And we still hear his mother, Thunder, scolding him, "Bumrambo- la-la-la, la-bum!"
Crickets chirp.
Mice squeak.
Snakes hiss.
Dogs bark.
Goats bleat.
Cows moo.
Lions roar.
And snails make no sound at all.
Babies babble.
And children talk.
Many years ago, hyenas were starving. Because of a famine, even goats, sheep and cows migrated to other places. Hyenas had nothing to eat.They gathered in one place to discuss the issue.
One of the hyenas said, "In our culture, we eat anything that is fleeing. Look, these clouds are fleeing."This hyena believed that the clouds were migrating to another place. He said, "Let's eat them."
Immediately, all the hyenas looked up and saw the clouds moving in the sky. One of the youngest hyenas asked, "How do we reach the clouds? They are very far away from the ground."
The oldest hyena said, "Let the strongest hyena stand on the ground and then let the rest of us stand on each other's backs. We will climb on one another's backs until we reach the clouds."
They agreed and started climbing up on one another's backs.Soon, there were no more hyenas left remaining on the ground except the strongest one.
After the last hyena climbed up, the hyena on the ground thought that the others had started eating. He asked, "Why don't you give me some of the food you're eating?"
However, the hyenas did not reach the clouds. They didn't find any food and so they had nothing to give to the strongest hyena standing on the ground.
The strongest hyena became impatient and moved to the left side. All the others came falling down to the right side. As a result, even today all hyenas limp on their right side.
In a village on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa,  a little girl worked in the fields with her mother. Her name was Wangari.
Wangari loved being outside. In her family's food garden she broke up the soil with her machete. She pressed tiny seeds into the warm earth.
Her favourite time of day was just after sunset. When it got too dark to see the plants,  Wangari knew it was time to go home. She would follow the narrow paths through the fields,  crossing rivers as she went.
Wangari was a clever child and couldn't wait to go to school. But her mother and father wanted her to stay and help them at home. When she was seven years old,  her big brother persuaded her parents to let her go to school.
She liked to learn! Wangari learnt more and more with every book she read. She did so well at school that she was invited to study in the United States of America. Wangari was excited! She wanted to know more about the world.
At the American university Wangari learnt many new things. She studied plants and how they grow. And she remembered how she grew: playing games with her brothers in the shade of the trees in the beautiful Kenyan forests.
The more she learnt,  the more she realised that she loved the people of Kenya. She wanted them to be happy and free. The more she learnt,  the more she remembered her African home.
When she had finished her studies,  she returned to Kenya. But her country had changed. Huge farms stretched across the land. Women had no wood to make cooking fires. The people were poor and the children were hungry.
Wangari knew what to do. She taught the women how to plant trees from seeds. The women sold the trees and used the money to look after their families. The women were very happy. Wangari had helped them to feel powerful and strong.
As time passed,  the new trees grew into forests,  and the rivers started flowing again. Wangari's message spread across Africa. Today,  millions of trees have grown from Wangari's seeds.
Wangari had worked hard. People all over the world took notice,  and gave her a famous prize. It is called the Nobel Peace Prize,  and she was the first African woman ever to receive it.
Wangari died in 2011,  but we can think of her every time we see a beautiful tree.
Mouse was looking for a new house.
This looks like a nice house.
"You can come and sleep with me," said Puppy. "Thank you," said Mouse.
That night,  Mouse's dreams were bouncy and muddy.
"You can come and sleep with me," said Parrot.   "Thank you," said Mouse.
That night,  Mouse's dreams were noisy and wild.
"You can come and sleep with me," said Fish.   "Thank you," said Mouse.
That night,  Mouse's dreams were cold and wet.
Mouse needed somewhere warm and dry.
Mouse found a bookshelf nearby.
That night,  Mouse had warm and cosy dreams. Good night Mouse.
Tom carries a tray of ripe bananas.
Tom goes to the market to sell bananas.
People at the market are buying fruit.
But no one is buying Tom's bananas. They prefer to buy fruit from women.
"In our community,  only women sell fruit," people say. "What kind of a man is this?" people ask.
But Tom does not give up. He calls,  "Buy my bananas! Buy my sweet ripe bananas!"
One woman picks up a bunch of bananas from the tray. She looks at the bananas carefully.
The woman buys the bananas.
More people come to the stall. They buy Tom's bananas and eat them.
Soon,  the tray is empty. Tom counts the money he earned.
Then Tom buys soap,  sugar,  and bread. He puts the things in his tray.
Tom balances the tray on his head and goes home.
Long ago, Thunder and Lightning lived on earth among people.
Thunder was the mother of Lightning.
Lightning had a bad temper.
When Lightning was angry, he destroyed people, houses and trees.
When Lightning caused such damage, Thunder made a loud noise.
Lightning did not pay attention to his mother.
At last,  people complained to the king.
The king sent Thunder and Lightning to live far away.
Lightning still burnt forests and crops when he was angry.
So people complained to the king again.
The king sent Thunder and Lightning to live in the sky.
But Lightning still burns and destroys when he is angry.
My village had many problems. We made a long line to fetch water from one tap.
We waited for food donated by others.
We locked our houses early because of thieves.
Many children dropped out of school.
Young girls worked as maids in other villages.
Young boys roamed around the village while others worked on people's farms.
When the wind blew,  waste paper hung on trees and fences.
People were cut by broken glass that was thrown carelessly.
Then one day,  the tap dried up and our containers were empty.
My father walked from house to house asking people to attend a village meeting.
People gathered under a big tree and listened.
My father stood up and said,  "We need to work together to solve our problems."
Eight-year-old Aminu,  sitting on a tree trunk shouted,  "I can help with cleaning up."
One woman said,  "The women can join me to grow food."
Another man stood up and said,  "The men will dig a well."
We all shouted with one voice,  "We must change our lives." From that day we worked together to solve our problems.
My heart feels a lot of things.
I feel happy when my granny tells us stories in the evening.
I feel silly when I play with my friend.
I feel bad when my dad says he does not have money.
I feel loved when my mom gives me a hug.
Once upon a time there was a husband and wife with children. The mother prepared food for the family each day. She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.
The father would divide the meat. He would say to the eldest child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."
Then he would say to the next child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older." Each small portion became even smaller.  It went like this for all the children. The youngest child got a tiny piece of meat.
The father kept the big pieces of meat for himself and his wife. The children were quiet and ate their food.
Years passed and the children grew up. The parents grew old. They became weak. The children looked after their old mother and father.
One day at meal time, the eldest child served the meat,  as usual. But this time she gave only a tiny piece to her father and a tiny piece to her mother.
She said to her parents, "You ate yours, now it is our time. We are old enough."  She served most of the meat to her brothers and sisters.
The father remembered what he did while his children were young. Mother and father agreed that it was not the right thing to do. They asked for forgiveness. The children promised that they would not repeat this mistake with their own children.
I wake up and make fire.
I boil some water.
I chop the firewood.
I stir the pot.
I sweep the floor.
I wash the dishes.
When my brother is busy playing!
Elephant and Hare were good friends.
They found grass and water for their animals.
They liked to play football.
Elephant scored more goals. Hare was not happy.
Hare asked Elephant, "What makes you a good player?" "My big legs."
Hare and Elephant ran a race. Hare won.
Elephant asked Hare, "What makes you a good runner?" "My thin legs."
Elephant asked, "How can I get thin legs?" "I will show you how."
Hare said, "Stand in the fire." Elephant did. He cried, "I am burning!"
Hare told Elephant, "This is the only way your legs can become thin."
Elephant moved out of the fire. He lay down.
For many days, Elephant was not able to stand.
When he was better, he walked home to his family.
Hare was very sorry. He asked Elephant to forgive him.
Adun was very beautiful. All the men in her village wanted to marry her. But Adun refused them all.
One market day,  a man borrowed legs from another man,  and arms from another,  and a body from a third man. Then this man joined all the parts together. He put his head on top and went to the market.
This man wanted Adun and was determined to marry her. Adun was pleased by his appearance. She wanted to be with him. The man came from a far town,  and Adun decided to return with him.
As Adun and the man journeyed to his place,  the owner of the legs took the legs back. Then the owner of the arms took his arms back. And finally the owner of the body took that back.
Only the head was left,  and the head went on. Adun was scared but she did not run away. They arrived at the house of the head.
The following morning,  before the head went to his farm,  he spoke to Tortoise. "If Adun tries to escape,  blow this horn to tell me," said the head.
After the head left,  Adun packed her things. Then she began to run away.
Seeing her,  Tortoise blew the horn,  "Head,  head,  Adun is about to run away," puffed Tortoise.
The head went up to Adun and said,  "Where do you think you are going?" Adun went back to the head's house.
Eventually Adun consulted a diviner about what to do. The diviner advised,  "Go and buy some bean cakes. Soak them in palm oil and put them in Tortoise's horn."
Adun followed the diviner's instructions. She put the oily cakes into the horn.
The following day,  she took her things and began to run away again. When Tortoise took the horn to blow it,  the delicious bean cakes fell into his mouth.
Tortoise ate,  ate and ate. And Adun ran away.
This is Cat.This is Dog.
Cat and Dog live in a house. A house with a door. A house with a roof.
Cat and Dog have a ball. The ball is red and blue and green.
Cat and Dog play with the ball. Cat throws the ball to Dog.Dog catches the ball. Dog throws the ball to Cat. Cat catches the ball.
Then Cat throws the ball very high.Oh! oh!
The ball is on the roof. The ball is on the roof of the house.
Cat and Dog can see the ball. Cat and Dog cannot get to the ball.
Cat and Dog cry. Then Elephant comes by.
Elephant is big. Elephant can see the ball. Elephant can get to the ball. Elephant gets the ball from the roof. Elephant takes the ball from the roof of the house.
Elephant gives the ball to Cat and Dog. Cat and Dog smile. Elephant smiles. Cat and Dog and Elephant smile.
Cat and Dog and Elephant play with the ball.Cat throws the ball to Dog. Dog catches the ball. Dog throws the ball to Elephant. Elephant catches the ball. Elephant throws the ball to Cat. Cat catches the ball.
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye Dog. Bye bye Elephant.
“I can’t lift you up, Shanu!” says Ammi. “You are too big!”
“You can’t walk to school alone, Shanu!” says Abbu. “You are too small!”
“You can’t sleep in the baby’s cot, Shanu!” says Dadu. “You are too big!”
“You can’t carry the baby to the park, Shanu!” says Dadi. “You are too small!”
Shanu is puzzled. Too big! Too small! How can she be too big andtoo small all at once?
Too big to wear her old pink frock.Too small to make dosas at the stove.
Too big to climb up on Dadu’s back?Too smallto carry the baby on hers?
“What am I the right size for?” Shanu wonders.
“You are just big enough to take me for my morning walks,” says Dadu.
“And you are just small enough for me to tell stories to,” says Dadi.
“And you will always, always be the perfect size...for this!" all say, and give her a warm, wonderful hug.
This is Cat.This is Dog.
Cat and Dog walk. They walk in their village.
Then they see an egg. The egg is in the grass. The egg is alone in the grass. The egg is all alone.
Cat and Dog walk to a bird. They ask the bird, "Is this your egg?"
But the bird says, "No, that is not my egg. Ask the owl. Maybe it is his egg."
Cat and Dog walk to the owl. They ask the owl, "Is this your egg?"
But the owl says, "No, that is not my egg. Ask the goose.  Maybe it is her egg."
Cat and Dog walk to the goose. They ask the goose, "Is this your egg?"
But the goose says, "No, that is not my egg. Ask the two ducks. Maybe it is their egg."
Cat and Dog walk to the two ducks. They ask the two ducks, "Is this your egg?"
But the two ducks say, "No, that is not our egg." Then the egg breaks.
There is a lizard in the egg. A baby lizard.
The baby lizard says, "Where is my mother? Where is my father? Where are my mother and father?" Cat and Dog bring the baby lizard to his mother and father.
Bye bye Cat. Bye bye Dog. Bye bye baby lizard.
There was once an old woman living by herself inside a bottle. She complained all the time.
One day a fairy passed by her home and saw her looking very sad.
The fairy stopped and asked her, "What is the problem? Why are you so sad?"
"I am tired of living in a bottle," replied the old lady.
The fairy said to her, "Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times."
After doing what she was told to do, the old woman found herself in a small house.
After a few days the fairy came back and found the woman still unhappy.
The fairy asked her, "What is wrong now? Why are you sad?"
"This house is too small. I do not like it," responded the old woman.
The fairy said to her, "Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times."
After doing what she was told to do, the old woman found herself in a big house.
The fairy came to see the old woman again. She found her still unhappy and grumpy.
The fairy asked her, "What is wrong old lady?" The old lady responded, "This house is dark and dirty."
The fairy said to her, "Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times."
After doing what she was told to do, the old woman found herself back inside the bottle.
The old woman could not see the blessings she received. She ended up in her bottle, alone and unhappy.
Look,  fire!
Fire burns.
Fire cooks.
Fire gives warmth.
Fire gives light.
Look,  fire!
Fire is wonderful.
And it is powerful.
When weboarded the plane, my son took out his puzzle book and saidto me, “Papa, let’s play ‘connecting the dots’.”“No beta”, I tried to explain, “You know Papabuilds biiiiiig buildings....for that he has to work on his laptop even duringvacation. But I have a surprise for you. Today, I’llshow you the tallest building I havebuilt – myaward winning project.”As the plane took off I exclaimed, ““Look son, that one is the city tower and just next to it is my dream project. I know we have boarded an early flight and so it is pretty dark outside but if you see carefully, you can locate it.”
Disappointed,he said,“Oh that small dot....because of THAT you missed my school project exhibition....I won first prize Papa....I wanted you to be there...”. Shockedby this reaction, I kept  staring athim, simultaneously trying hardto remember what the school projectwas. When I looked back out of the window, the dot...er...the building hadvanished as the plane had soared high.Aghast, I keptlooking out and thinking.
I realized that for pastmany months, I had kept feeling that I was missing something but couldn’tpinpoint it. But now at36000 feet above the ground, it dawned on me. I didn’t want to miss the‘sun’rise. Suddenly, the sky seemed clear of anyclouds. “Beta”, I called softly, ‘Let’s do theconnecting dots puzzle.” His face lit up. Grinning, he asked, “but what aboutyour dot I mean your work?” Holding his hand tightly I replied, “That canwait.....I have to connect some more important dots first....”
A long time ago,  there was a greedy Hyena.
There was also Tortoise. Hyena and Tortoise were friends.
Hyena told Tortoise,  "Let us search for honey."
Hyena ran fast. Tortoise followed slowly. He was afraid.
They crossed a river. They got wet.
Then they saw beehives. Hyena ran to the hives.
Hyena told Tortoise,  "Climb up and get the beehive."
Tortoise climbed slowly. Hyena was angry. He shouted at Tortoise.
Tortoise touched the beehive. Bees swarmed in the air.
Tortoise fell. The beehive fell on him. Hyena licked the honey.
The bees stung Hyena. He ran. The bees followed him.
Hyena ran into the river. The bees still followed him.
The beehive and the honey dried on Tortoise's back.
Tortoise got a shell to protect himself. He went home.
The stings caused patches on Hyena's body.
Long time ago,  there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark,  they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said,  "I am a louse. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu."
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate,  drank,  and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left,  they had a bad thought. They said,  "No,  it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse."  Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone,  and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
Chat was born blind. Her eyes had never seen her parents, or her brothers and sisters. She knew their faces by touch.
One day, Chat was strolling in the garden. She liked the sweet scent of flowers. She loved to touch their soft petals.
Chat wished she could see flowers, just once. "They are lovely," she said to herself.
Every day, Chat walked in the garden. She knew her way around. Today, she raised her head to the skies.
Suddenly, she heard thunder and lightning. "I need to hurry back to the house," Chat thought.
Rain began to fall. Chat slipped, lost her balance and fell. She hit her head on a stone.
When Chat woke up, there were people around her. "What happened?" she asked.
"You fell and bumped your head," her father said. "Thank God you are fine," said her mother.
"Daddy, mummy?" asked Chat. She also called the names of her brothers and sisters. "Please, get me a flower."Everyone was surprised.
Her sister returned with a flower. Chat held it gently. "It is so lovely," she said.
Her family looked at one another. "Chat, can you see the flower?" her mother asked.
Chat played with the flower in her hand. "You are all so beautiful, just like this flower," she smiled.
Ostrich and Lioness were once good friends.
Unlike Lioness, Ostrich fed her chicks well.
Lioness’s cubs did not have enough food to eat.
Lioness wished the fat chicks were hers.
When Ostrich was not home, Lioness took the chicks.
When Ostrich returned, she asked, “Where are my children?”
Ostrich found her chicks with Lioness at her hut.
Lioness said, “The chicks are mine now. Take the cubs.”
Ostrich asked herself, “How can I get my children back?”
She called all the animals for a meeting.
The animals arrived for the meeting.
Elephant asked Ostrich and Lioness to speak.
Most of the animals were afraid to blame Lioness.
Squirrel said, “Children that look like birds belong to Ostrich.”
Then Squirrel ran into a hole.
Lioness was very angry. She went home with her cubs.
All of my buttons are circles.
Some of my buttons are green.
All of my buttons are small.
Some of my buttons are yellow.
All of my buttons are nice.
Some of my buttons are red.
All of my buttons are shiny.
Some of my buttons are blue.
All of my buttons are good.
I like all my buttons.
There was a spider called Anansi. Anansi was too lazy to cook his own food. Instead, he used to visit his friends and eat the delicious food they had cooked.
One day, Anansi was passing Rabbit's house when he smelled green vegetables cooking. He was very excited. Rabbit said to Anansi, “They're not quite ready yet. You can help me to wash up while we wait.” Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. I'll come back later.”
“How will I call you when they're ready?” asked Rabbit. Anansi thought for a minute. “I'll spin a web,” he said. “I'll tie one end around my leg and one end to your pot. When the greens are ready, pull on the web string. I'll come right away.” So Anansi tied the web to the pot, and walked on.
Anansi saw Monkey and his wife, cooking beans in a large pot. “Come and join us! The beans are nearly ready.” Monkey said. Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the beans are ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
As Anansi walked by Warthog's house, he smelled sweet potatoes. Warthog told Anansi, “My pot is full of sweet potatoes and honey! Come and share my food with me. Take this fork and help me to stir it.” Anansi replied, “I'll come back later. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the sweet potatoes areready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
By the time Anansi arrived at the river, each of his eight legs was tied to a pot of delicious food. Then, Anansi felt a pull on one of his legs. “Rabbit's food is ready!” Anansi thought, licking his lips.
He felt a second pull. And a third. And a fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth pull. Everyone was pulling on the web strings at the same time! “Stop! Stop!” he cried in pain, as his legs were stretched thinner and thinner. But no one could hear him.
Finally, the web strings could hold no longer. They snapped, one by one. Anansi rolled into the river to soothe his painful legs. But his legs would not return to their normal shape. Anansi was too embarrassed to go to any of his friends that day.
Thuli has short hair.
Anna has long hair.
Cathy has the longest hair.
Zama has plaited her hair.
Baba has a beard.
Zanele has combed her hair.
Thabo has cut his hair.
Themba has shaved his hair.
Once up on a time, there were two friends. The one was clever, the other was stupid. The stupid man's wife was clever. The clever man's wife was stupid.
While they were chatting, the clever man said, "Your wife is clever, but you are stupid. My wife is also stupid, so she might be more compatible with you."
The stupid man asked, "Between me and you, who is stupider?" Then he said, "I am as clever as you are." "If so, let's go to a judge and I will ask you a question," replied the clever man. They agreed to go.
In front of the judge, the clever man asked, "How many stars are there in the sky? Where is the centre of the world? Answer both questions, or we will swap our wives." The judge allowed some time for the stupid man to return with the answers.
One night, the stupid man was counting the stars, sitting on the roof of his house. "What are you doing?" his wife asked him.
He replied, "My friend asked me how many stars there are in the sky, and where the centre of the earth is. Now I'm counting the stars."
"Don't worry, I will tell you the answers," said his wife. She gave her husband a sack of grain. She said, "If they ask you how many stars are in the sky, tell them it is the same as the number of grains in the sack."
Then she gave him a stick and said, "If they ask you where the centre of the world is, push the stick into the ground and tell them it is in the centre. If they complain, tell them to measure it."
The stupid man arrived with his wife's advice. First he answered, "The number of stars is the same as the number of grains in this sack." Then he pushed the stick into the ground and said, "This is the centre of the earth."
The judge was amused and asked, "Who told you this?" The stupid man replied, "My wife."    The judge continued, "Your wife is very clever, so she should be with a clever man. You will swap your wives."  Then, the judge set an appointment to swap their wives.
The stupid man told his wife, "I won, but the judge said that you are clever, and don't deserve to be with me." His wife replied, "Don't worry I have a solution to this too."
The time came for the judge to swap the wives. The clever wife gave the judge a saucepan of food as a gift. When the judge opened the saucepan, he saw a roasted chicken still with all its feathers! Shocked, he muttered, "Oh, I see, so she belongs with her stupid husband afterall!"
It is hot sunny Saturday morning on the farm. Maya, Duksie and Doobie are helping Mama K in her vegetable garden. The children work all morning. They dig compost into the soil. They weed and water. Then they harvest what is ripe and ready. Today each of the children will take home freshly picked strawberries, spinach and carrots.
Mama K always gives the children a treat for helping her. Sometimes its cake or chocolate, or she buys longsweets that look like snakes. Sometimes it's apples, pears or oranges. Mama K has only one rule. “Share it fair!” The children know they must share the treats equally, so they all get the same amount.
Today Mama K has baked a round strawberry cake with pink icing and berries from her garden. The childrenwait on the grass for their treat. “Here you go!” smiles Mama K. “But remember the rule. Everyone must get the same. Share it fair! Don't fight!”
Maya has the first turn to share the cake. She uses the knife to trace lines in the icing. The others watch her. She does not cut the cake yet. The others must first agree if her way is fair. “I think I will make two cuts down like this. Now we have three slices, all the same!” Maya shows them.
“No way!” says Duksie, “the one in the middle is much too big!” Doobie also shakes his head. Maya laughs and shrugs and tells Duksie to try.
“Here! Pass me the knife, I'll do it. Easy peasy!” chants Duksie. First she rubs out Maya's pattern in the icing and licks her fingers.
Then she makes one cut across and one down. “Look, I made my three slices!” “That's not fair!” shout Mayaand Doobie together.
“Share it fair! The pieces must be the same size and shape,” adds Doobie. “Why don't you try Doobie, SmartyPants?” smirks Duksie. “I bet you can't do it!”
“I wish the cake was a square or a rectangle, and then it would be easy!” says Doobie thoughtfully. “Or, if there were four of us to share the round cake that would also be easy,” says Maya.
And then! A picture comes into Doobie's head. He sees the sparkling silver badge at the front of his father's big red truck. On Sundays he helps his dad to wash the truck, and to polish the shiny badge. “I've got it! I've got it!I know how to do it,” yells Doobie.
“You are full of surprises, Doobie,” says Duksie sweetly. “How did you work it out?” Maya asks. Doobie smiles to himself. For now it his secret. Later, he will tell his dad.
First he uses a knife to smooth Duksie's lines in the icing. Then he traces three lines on the cake. It looksjust like the badge on his dad's truck, with three equal parts.
Just then Mama K comes out of her house. She is carrying a tray with three glasses of cold strawberry juice. “Look Mama K! Doobie found the way to cut the cake into three equal pieces,” Maya tells her. “Well done Doobie,three equal slices! You shared fairly, I'm proud of you all. Now cut the cake and drink your juice. It's time to go home. I will give you plates to take your pieces of cake.”
Maya cuts along Doobie's lines to make three equal slices. Just for fun, the children stack the slices on top of each other to check that they are the same size. Yes they are!
Doobie's dad arrives to pick up the children, and Doobie runs off to meet him. He can't wait to tell his dad how the badge on the truck helped him to solve a very tricky problem!
Frog and Snake are friends.
Frog says,  "Come with me to visit my mother."
"Thank you," Snake says. "Who will watch our homes?"
"I will watch your homes," says Monkey.
Frog puts white ants in a bag for her mother.
Frog and Snake leave at dawn. They go into a forest.
They meet a gang of squirrels. Snake is afraid.
Frog protects her friend.
They are hungry when they get to Mother's house.
They wash and get ready to eat.
"Snake,  please sit up," says Frog.
Snake tries to sit up,  but she is not a frog.
"I cannot sit up like a frog," says Snake.
Frog will not listen.
"You do not understand me. I am going home."
Snake is annoyed. "I thought Frog was my friend."
My name is Kobole. I live in a small village.
One day, I was out picking fruits. I saw something I had never seen before.
There were colourful lines in the sky.
I dropped all the fruit and ran to tell people at home.
People were standing outside surprised.
I said happily, "It is a beautiful sheet hanging from the sky." "No! I think someone is pouring paint from the sky," Neno said.
Some people agreed with me. Others thought Neno was right. We began to argue.
A man from a faraway village said, "You are all wrong."
We shouted, "Tell us then what it is if we are wrong."
The stranger said, "It is the rainbow. Have you never seen the rainbow before?"
We asked the stranger, "Rainbow? What is a r-a-i-n-b-o-w?"
Neno asked, "Is it ours? Can we keep it here?" We never got answers to our questions because the man had left.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
Where is my cat?
Is it under the bed?
Is it on top of the cupboard?
Is it behind the couch?
Is it next to the bin?
Is it inside the basket?
Is it outside the house?
Here it is!
Chat was born blind. Her eyes had never seen her parents, or her brothers and sisters. She knew their faces by touch.
One day, Chat was strolling in the garden. She liked the sweet scent of flowers. She loved to touch their soft petals.
Chat wished she could see flowers, just once."They are lovely," she said to herself.
Every day, Chat walked in the garden. She knew her way around. Today, she raised her head to the skies.
Suddenly, she heard thunder and lightning. "I need to hurry back to the house," Chat thought.
Rain began to fall. Chat slipped, lost her balance and fell. She hit her head on a stone.
When Chat woke up, there were people around her."What happened?" she asked.
"You fell and bumped your head," her father said. "Thank God you are fine," said her mother.
"Daddy, mummy?" asked Chat. She also called the names of her brothers and sisters."Please, get me a flower." Everyone was surprised.
Her sister returned with a flower. Chat held it gently."It is so lovely," she said.
Her family looked at one another."Chat, can you see the flower?" her mother asked.
Chat played with the flower in her hand."You are all so beautiful, just like this flower," she smiled.
Kadogo and Juma are friends who love running. They run together every day.
One day they were reading maps at school. Juma said, "Let's run across our continent. Let's race, together with Africans from many countries!" "Let's go, we can do it! African unity!" cheered Kadogo.
They decided to carry a unity torch on their journey. They lit the torch and began to run.The race started at the southern tip of our continent, in Cape Town, South Africa.
From South Africa they headed along the west coast. They ran through Namibia, Angola, DRC, Congo and Cameroon. Runners quickly joined them from these countries.The growing group of people rested in Nigeria, in Abuja.
More runners from West Africa joined the friends as they passed through Nigeria. They continued together, following the River Niger.
A sandstorm in Mali made it difficult to run. Juma was the strongest of all of them. He led the way safely, holding the unity torch high.
At Guinea's coast in Conakry the dusty runners washed in the sea. Then they decided to race to Morocco through Senegal and Mauritania.All the way, more people joined them.
At Casablanca, the runners enjoyed playing on the beaches. They made more friends.Next, they set off across North Africa.
They ran through Algeria and Libya, and stopped in Egypt to visit the pyramids. Then they turned and headed east,  following the River Nile to East Africa.
They ran through deserts and national parks. More young people joined them in Kampala, Uganda. The group ran into Kenya, and headed for its coast and the city of Mombasa.
When they reached the sea, they sat on the beach and ate coconut rice with fish. Juma said, "Let's take the unity torch to Mount Kilimanjaro, in Tanzania."
But by this time, Juma was very tired. Just as they left Kenya, he fell down. The runners stopped the race. Everyone came to help Juma.
Juma passed on the torch to Kadogo. He said, "You can carry the torch to Mount Kilimanjaro. Let's light a flame for African unity."
After lighting a unity flame high on Kilimanjaro, the group of runners headed into southern Africa.People cheered the runners saying, "You are our heroes. We are together!"
They stopped to swim in Lake Malawi, and rest before going to the next country. Kadogo said to Juma, "We've run from farthest point in southern Africa to the farthest point in North Africa. Now we are in the south again. Our journey is ending."
The unity runners finally carried the torch to Great Zimbabwe, the ancient city of that country. Crowds gathered at this important place, cheering to welcome the tired runners."We did it!" said Kadogo. "What a race!" smiled Juma.
In a village there was a disagreement among people of different occupations. Everyone thought their work was the most important!
The teacher said that he had the most important occupation. “Without teachers you could not go to school and learn.”
The builder said that he had the most important occupation. “Without builders you would not have schools to learn in or houses to sleep in.”
The carpenter said that he had the most important occupation. “Without carpenters you would have no furniture for your houses and schools.”
The doctor claimed that he had the most important occupation. “Without doctors and nurses you could get sick and die.”
The farmer said that she had the most important occupation. “Without farmers you would not have food to eat.”
The student argued that students had the most important work. “Without students, there would be no teachers, builders, doctors, farmers, or carpenters.”
Eventually everyone agreed that all the occupations are important. We need teachers, builders, doctors, farmers, and carpenters. But everyone has to be a student first!
Dawn in the morning
Roger and Rosine hear their mother outside, coughing.
They immediately wake up.
Roger approaches his sister
He reminds her what they mother
Tells them every morning.
She tells them to take a cup,
fill it with water,
Toothpaste,
and then brush their teeth.
Rosine takes a cup
Toothbrush with toothpaste.
She sees nothing in the bucket.
Rosine advises her brother, Roger to go to fetch water at the river.
He takes a ten-little jerry cane and leaves.Rosine stays home while sweeping the compound.
There were many snakes near Nyare village. The biggest was Lego. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, Apiyo, Ajoh and Atieno went to fetch firewood. Grandmother said, “Be careful of Lego. Fetch firewood only.” Ajoh did not pay attention.
The girls packed some food, ropes and a sharp machete. Apiyo said, “I am the oldest, so you must listen to me.”
They talked and laughed as they walked. Suddenly, Apiyo said, “Be quiet. We are near where Lego lives.”
Atieno said, “These are Lego's golden teeth. Let us take them.” Apiyo reminded them, “Remember what grandmother told us. We must fetch only firewood.”
“Grandmother does not know anything. I will take the golden teeth,” saidAjoh. Apiyo and Atieno were not happy.
Lego came looking for his golden teeth. They were not there. Lego thought, “The one who took my teeth will know who I am!”
On their way home, the girls heard, “Hzzzzzzzz!” Lego was there with his mouth wide open, ready to swallow.
Lego asked, “Who took my golden teeth?” No one answered. Lego said, “The innocent girl will sing well. The thief will not.”
Apiyo sang: It's not me! It's not me who took the teeth! The one who took is near!Atieno also sang well.
Ajoh sang badly and the words did not come out. Lego shouted, “Sing like the others.” Lego knew that Ajoh took his golden teeth.
Lego swallowed Ajoh. Her sisters ran home to say what happened. The girls' grandmother said sadly, “I warned them, if only Ajohhad listened.”
There lived a hunter who survived by trapping wild animals. For many days he did not trap any single animal. His family began to starve. Hunting was their main source of food.
One morning he went to check his traps in the forest. He was lucky that day, one of his traps had caught a giraffe.
He got very happy when he saw the giraffe. He celebrated that his family will get food. He said, "Let me carefully get the giraffe without losing much of its blood."
"Let me cut the ankle tendons so that there is little blood."
He crept slowly, with his spear aimed at the ankle tendons. To his disappointment, he missed the target. The spear cut the trap!
The giraffe jumped and before it could get away, the hunter grabbed the tail. He was dragged away.
He was dragged through the forest. He finally let go of the tail. He was left bruised in the thorny bushes.
He struggled his way out of the thorny bush with injuries and went home miserably. His greed and foolishness had denied him food!
Peace is very important thing in our daily life.
whoever does not have peace does not plan or do anything right.
If you don't have peace, you lose the living hope and you feel that whatever you do yields nothing.
Peace is the root of living hope, wealthy and sustainable development.
A family with peace is so strong that nothing can demolish or divide its members.
Friends with peace love each other a true love and they live without any disruption.
A country with peace does not have wars and what the citizens will, they gather their force and earn it.
May peace be with you all!
Dog and Jackal were Sekamana's workers.They hunted for him during the day.
They guarded his compound at night.
Each evening, Sekamana ate good meat for dinner.But he gave only bones to Dog and Jackal.
One day, Jackal said to Dog, “We must rebel against Sekamana’s bad treatment. Run away with me!”
But out of respect and fear, Dog decided to stay. Jackal ran away.
Soon, Sekamana noticed that Jackal was gone. "Where is my brave hunter?" he asked Dog. Dog told him the whole story.
Since then Jackal has not returned.He hunts by himself and eats the meat he has hunted.
But Dog is still eating bones.
Time is a parcel.
In this parcel of time, you find more parcels.
A parcel is a day.A day is 86,400 seconds.
You must unwrap time and use it well.Learn new things.
Eat.Play.Rest.Dream.Think.
Plant a tree, a forest grows. Solve a problem.
When your money grows,save some, spend some, share some.
If you fail, start again.Time wraps gifts as days.
Monday and Tuesday.Wednesday and Thursday.Friday and Saturday, even Sunday.
These are special friends.Enjoy their friendship.
When the clock says tick tock remember my words.
Time is a peculiar parcel, a unique gift.Use it well.
I am always hungry. I love to eat with my mother. But my mom is not at home. she goes for work early in the mornining.  I am waiting for her eagarly.
When she comes home  she feed us with love. I am very happy.
I  sleep with my mother happily.
Fana and her family live in Debre Birhan, a busy town in Ethiopia. Fana is a Grade 3 student. She is good-hearted and wise.
Fana loves animals. She has a cat, two hens, a goat and a dove. She spends time with these animals, feeding them, and playing with them.
One day, Fana was playing in the school yard with her friends when she saw children throwing stones at doves. “Why are they hurting the doves?” She asked herself.
She stopped playing and ran towards the children throwing stones. At first her friends didn't understand what was happening, then theyfollowed her. “Stop throwing stones,” shouted Fana.
The other children ran away. Fana caught the two injured doves. She saw wounds on their wings. She decided to take the two doves home to look after them.
She fed the doves. In the evening she told her family what she saw and did during the day, and how she saved the doves.
In the morning Fana and her parents went to the clinic and got medicine for the doves. After a few days, the doves' wounds healed. Fana felt very happy.
Fana always tells her friends, “I love animals. Animals are useful to us and they are our friends. We must protect and preserve them.”
It is dry.
The sun is hot.
It is windy.
It is cloudy.
It is cold.
It is raining.
There is thunder.
I see a rainbow.
She used to get up in the morning,
and prepare a breakfast,
then she set up the table and then call others to come to share with her.
She would go to school
and study with much effort.
When she returned, she should clean the house.
after that, she should do self-study
or else, she might read pictured stories.
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
There was a husband and wife with two daughters. They lived happily until one day the mother died. The man married again. His new wife did not get along with his daughters. The man was confused. He loved his daughters but he also loved his new wife.
In the end he decided to send away his daughters. He took them on a journey. When they reached a big tree, they sat under it to rest. He said to them, "My daughters wait for me here until I return."
While in the bush, the man cut off his finger nails. He said, "My nails, I am abandoning my daughters. When they call for me, respond to them."The girls waited under the tree for their father, but he did not return.
They called, "Father! Father! Where are you?" A voice responded, "I am coming! I am coming!" It was the man's nails.They searched in the direction of the voice, but could not find their father. Finally, they realised he was not coming back.
The two girls returned to the tree and prayed loudly, "Creator of this tree, hear us." The tree split into pieces and became a nice house. Again the girls prayed, "God of fruits, feed us." Fruit dropped from the sky for them to eat.
Rather than thinking about their father, the daughters chose to live their lives as best they could They stayed in the house and ate only the fruit which dropped from the sky. But after a while they wanted to eat meat.
The girls knew that Hyena lived near their home. He kept many animals and ate meat every day. Eventually, they decided to go and steal meat from Hyena. So the older girl went alone to Hyena's house.
Hyena was sitting at his fire but the girl did not see him. He caught her and tied her up. Hyena decided to boil her for supper. He put the girl into a pot with water and lit the fire, and then he went out.
After a while, the younger girl began to wonder why her sister had not returned. She went to Hyena's house and saw her sister in the pot on the fire.She prayed, "God of pots, please don't let my sister die."
Immediately, the pot broke into pieces and the older sister fell out alive. The girls ran away before Hyena came back. When they arrived at their house they found many riches there.Many years passed and the sisters grew to women.
One day, a man wearing old and dirty clothes knocked on the sisters' door, asking for help. When the older sister looked at him, she was reminded of their father. She asked the man his name and where he came from.
When he finished explaining, the women knew that this old man was their father. They told him their part of the story.The man wept with joyful surprise. "Can you forgive me?" he asked. The sisters welcomed their father and invited him to stay. And in time, they forgave him.
This is Natabo.She has six brothers.
Her parents giveher a small pot. She loves it.
One day herbrothers break the pot.
Natabo cannotfind her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away.She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Pleasecome down," theyask.
Her brotherssing, "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
Once upon a time, there was a man called Byantaka who had a cow. Each day Byantaka grazed his cow. He also gave the cow water to drink. But Byantaka only had a very small pot for water.
So he went at his neighbour's home to borrow a bigger pot for water. His neighbour agreed to lend Byantaka his biggest clay pot saying, "My neighbour's problem is my problem."
After a few days, Byantaka went to apotter's place and bought a small pot. He took it home. He put the small pot inside the big pot that he had borrowed from his neighbour.
Then he put the big pot, with the small pot inside it,on his head. He carried the big pot to the neighbour who loaned him the pot.
Byantaka told him, "I am returning your pot, it has reproduced." The neighbour was amazed that his pot had produced another pot. He praised Byantaka saying, "Your home is blessed."
After a while, Byantaka went back to his neighbour to borrow the pot again. He did not have good intentions.
The owner of the big pot waited in vain for Byantaka to return his pot. Eventually he went to Byantaka's home and said, "I have come for my pot."
Byantaka told his neighbour, "My friend, our pot died. I was just on my way to tell you the bad news."
His neighbour clapped his hands together in surprise. His face began to swell with anger. He shouted at Byantaka, "I have never heard of a pot dying!"
Byantaka replied, "My friend you should accept these things. Everything that produces must die. I was also very sorry about the big pot's death."
His neighbour was very angry and he went to court to report Byantaka. The judge listened to explanations from both of them. He found the owner of the pot was in the wrong.
"When Byantaka told you that the pot had reproduced, you accepted. When he says that every living thing which reproduces must die, he is correct." That is how the judge judged the case.
Byantaka's neighbour went home walking like a snail. Byantaka had got the big pot with his cleverness.
There was a time when all the animals lived together as friends. One day they decided to have a meeting to elect a king.
Rooster wanted to be king. So he lied to the other animals. He told them, “The red comb on my head is fire! Don't touch the comb on my head!”
The other animals believed Rooster. They decided to elect Rooster as their king. The animals hoped that Rooster's fire would help them in cold weather.
Then came a day when it rained. And rained. And rained. It was cold. Everything was wet and cold.
“Where can we get fire to warm our bodies?” Rabbit asked the other animals.
“We can get fire from the comb on Rooster's head,” replied Monkey. “Rooster is our king because he has fire on his head,” said Monkey.
The animals agreed with Monkey. They sent Fox to collect fire from king Rooster.
Fox found Rooster in a deep sleep. So he decided to take fire without asking Rooster.
Fox collected some dry grass. He put the grass next to the comb on Rooster's head. Nothing happened. The grass did not catch fire.
“Wake up king Rooster!” yelled Fox. “We need fire now.”
But Rooster could not give fire to Fox.
Fox was angry. He went back to the other animals. He told them the truth about the comb on Rooster's head. From that day, no one was afraid of Rooster. And foxes eat roosters and their families.
Ostrich and Lioness were great friends. Both of them had young ones.
Unlike the Lioness, the Ostrich fed her chicks well.
The Lioness' cubs had little food to eat.
The Lioness looked at the Ostrich's chicks and thought, “They are beautiful! I wish they were mine.”
One day, when the Ostrich was away, the Lioness took the chicks away to her home.
The Ostrich returned and found the cubs in her home instead.  “Where are my children?” she cried.
The Ostrich ran to the Lioness' hut and saw her chicks with Lioness.
The Lioness refused to let the Ostrich take her chicks. She said, “They are mine now. You can have the cubs.”
The Ostrich was angry and upset. “What can I do to get back my children?” she wondered to herself.
Then she thought, “I know what to do. I will call all the animals for a meeting.”
The animals gathered together.
Elephant asked the Ostrich and Lioness to speak.
Most of the animals were afraid to blame the Lioness.
Finally, Squirrel stood up and said, “Children that look like birds, belong to the Ostrich. Those with tails, belong to the Lioness.”
Then Squirrel disappeared into a hole. All the animals cheered.
Lioness was very annoyed. She went home with her cubs.
She carried me for nine months.
She made sure that I grew up healthy and strong.
She put me to bed every night.
She made sure that I woke up early every morning.
She took me shopping at the market.
And allowed me to choose my own shoes and clothes.
She counselled me whenever I went wrong.
I will never forget her love in my life.
Once upon a time there was a husband and wife with children.The mother prepared food for the family each day. She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.
The father would divide the meat. He would say to the eldest child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."
Then he would say to the next child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."Each small portion became even smaller. It went like this for all the children. The youngest child got a tiny piece of meat.
The father kept the big pieces of meat for himself and his wife. The children were quiet and ate their food.
Years passed and the children grew up. The parents grew old. They became weak. The children looked after their old mother and father.
One day at meal time, the eldest child served the meat, as usual. But this time she gave only a tiny piece to her father and a tiny piece to her mother.
She said to her parents, "You ate yours, now it is our time. We are old enough."She served most of the meat to her brothers and sisters.
The father remembered what he did while his children were young. Mother and father agreed that it was not the right thing to do.They asked for forgiveness. The children promised that they would not repeat this mistake with their own children.
I peel the potatoes.
I chop a cabbage.
I grate the carrots.
I wash the beans.
I cut the butternut.
I chop the spinach.
My mom chops the onions.
Onions make me cry when they are chopped.
