A rat has entered the house. Grandma was the first to see it."Rat!" He jumped on the sofa as he shouted.The little pillows in it all fell down.
"Where?" Dad climbed out the window as he heard that.The curtains all fell down as he pulled."There!" Mom jumped on the table shouting. The plates in it fell down and broke.
﻿"Catch the mouse," Mithun looked at the cat and shouted.The cat saw the mouse, then ran away and crawled under the bed."Rat!" Mithun ran after the cat shouting.
"I will chase away that rat," said the mother boldly.He took a broom and stabbed here and there."You're a rat," Dad shouted. Mom saw the rat and he too hid under the cot.
"I know how to get rid of this rat!" Grandma jumped down from the sofa. He rolled up a newspaper and stabbed it here and there.
"Rat!" Said Dad. He climbed a little further up the window."Left with you!"Grandma looked at the mouse. He too ran and hid under the bed.
"Damn!" Said Dad. He could not climb above it.Slowly descended from the window. He hid under the bed without catching the mouse's eye!
“Rat! Rat! ” That everyone shouted together.Papa woke up to that noise.She sat up in bed and rubbed her eyes gently.Um, of course, yes, I know this, why it's something known in advance.
It had two eyes, four legs, and a long tail."Rat!" Papa clapped his hands happily.Papa looked at the rat and the rat started to run. Papa also ran backwards!
Climb on the sofa, jump out the window, jump on the table, roll on the pillows ...
... slipped between the curtains, stumbled on the plates, and ran out the door!
Not here, not there.Where have you gone?
Not on the sofa.Not under the cot.
Not in the box.Not under my sister's frock.
Not under the pillow.Not in my bag.Sob, sob, where have you gone?
I have looked in every room, l have looked under every book.
I have looked under the chair,I have looked under the stool.Where have you gone?
Soon granny came back from her walk."Look what I found in the park."
"It can sway, it can bounce.It can spin, it can dangle.Ha-ha, hee-hee," said Granny with a giggle.
Oh Granny! Thank you so much!You have found my dear yo-yo!
"Yo-yo? What a funny name!What a funny toy!I want to play with it,It gives me so much joy!"
Giggle, giggle, giggling away,Granny played, with my little toy.For the rest of the day!
Feet
Legs
Knees
Waist
Belly
Chest
Hands
Arms
Elbows
Head
a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing. The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish. They didn't saw any fish bigger than this! Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM! They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boywearing a beautifulshirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like that boy," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
"Lineup class! Let’s go to the park," Laila Miss says.Allthe students hold hands, chattering away. Kavya stands by herself.Asthey start walking, Laila Miss asks, "Does anyone know what acaterpillar becomes when it grows up?"  Kavya’sstomach flips. She knows the answer! Should she say something?
Kavyaand her family have just moved to Bengaluru from her village.Theylive at the construction site where her parents work.It’shard living in a half-finished house. The air smells of smoke, andthe honking traffic makes it hard to sleep. The towering buildings,zooming cars, and busy people make her feel very, very small.
Kavyahas been coming to school for a week. She still hasn’t spoken toanyone.Whatif they make fun of her accent? Or tease her because she’s neverbeen to school before?  Kavyatakes a deep breath and raises her hand. In a noisy city likeBengaluru, she can’t be quiet forever.
"Whencaterpillars grow up, they become butterflies," Kavya says."That’sright!" Laila Miss says."Caterpillarsare only caterpillars for a few weeks," Kavya says. "They spendthat whole time eating leaves." "Theymust get very big," says Mary, her classmate."Theydo!""After they eat and eat and eat, caterpillars weave cocoons on the sides of plants. They go inside, where they grow and change," says Kavya.
"That’scorrect," Laila Miss says. "They stay in the cocoons for abouttwo weeks. When they come out, they are butterflies.""Look,we’re at the park!" Mary says. Kavya gasps. The park is covered in butterflies!
Bluebutterflies the colour of rivers. Yellow butterflies the colour ofsunlight.Orangebutterflies the colour of ripe chikoos. Black-and-white butterfliesthe colours of starry skies.These are all the colours Kavya misses from her village.She feels her heart flutter.
"Every year, butterflies travel thousands of kilometres to come to this park. They are here formore food, better weather, and a safe placeto lay eggs," Laila Miss says.  "This journey is calledmigration."
"Don’tthey get tired, flapping their wings for so long?" a classmateasks."Ifthere is a strong wind, they don’t have to flap their wings,"Kavya says. "They spread their wings and glide.""Thatmust be bumpy," Mary whispers to Kavya.
Kavyathinks about the bus ride to Bengaluru – squeezed in between allthe luggage. Bumping and tumbling for hours and hours and hours. Isthat how a butterfly feels on the wind?
"Whenbutterflies migrate, they follow rivers. To stay healthy, they stopalong the riverbank to soak up minerals with their feet. It’scalled mud-puddling," Laila Miss says."Mud-puddling?"Mary says. "That sounds like fun."Maryand Kavya smile at each other. "Itis," Kavya says. "But now puddles are hard to find."InKavya’s village, men in trucks take sand away from the river. Theweather gets hotter and hotter. There is less and less rain.
Last year, the river went dry. The butterfliesdidn’t have enough water to mud-puddle. Kavya’s family didn’thave enough water to farm.  That’swhy they moved to Bengaluru.
"Youknow a lot about butterflies, Kavya," says Laila Miss."That’sbecause they are my favourite insects," says Kavya."Whydo you love butterflies so much, Kavya?" asks Mary.Howcan Kavya choose just one thing? Sheloves how their bodies are sometimes spotted and sometimes striped.How they drink nectar with their long noses. How they spread pollen,which makes more flowers grow.
"Theyfly far, but wherever they land, they make new friends," Kavyasays, squeezing Mary’s hand. "They’re very small, but they’realso very brave.""Justlike you," Laila Miss says.Kavyasmiles a smile as wide as a butterfly’s wings.
Makea Butterfly Rest StationButterfliesin India migrate twice a year. Their journey is getting harder andharder because our forests and rivers are disappearing. Butterfliesdon’t have enough places to rest. Many get tired along the way. Oneway to help butterflies is to make safe spaces for them to stop andhave a good meal.
Here’show to make a butterfly rest station:Find	a flat vessel with high edges, like a thali or	a	plate.Butterflies	love bright colours. Paint the vessel red, yellow, or orange.Fill	the vessel with butterfly food. It’s easy to make! Mix four cups	of water with one cup of sugar.
Add pieces of over-ripe fruit. Butterflies love bananas, guavas, mangoes, papayas, and oranges.Keep the vessel out on your veranda, windowsill, or anywhere outside.Clean and refill the vessel every two to three days.To attract even more butterflies, plant flowers that butterflies love. You can plant verbena, geraniums, dahlias, or sunflowers. You don’t need a lot of space – you can plant them in pots on the ground, or keep them on windowsills.
Why is the sky blue?
It's not always blue.Is not it?
Why are the leaves green?
They are not always green.Is not it?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow.Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is the blood red?
There is iron in the blood.It makes it red.
Why is salt white?I do not know!
Why have you not done your homework?Miss, it is all because of the cat.
The cat sat on the tree.So I took a ladder to climb the tree.
But the ladder was broken. So I took a hammer.The hammer made a noise.So the baby woke up.
Mother ran out to see the baby.So the monkey came in.
The monkey ate all the food.So there was no food for us.
Father bought chicken biryani for us.So the dog followed him.
The dog ate my notebook.So I couldn't bring my homework.
So, the dog ate your homework?
Yes, Miss. But it is all because of the cat.
Sukhiya Kaka lived in a village called Bitauna. Bitauna was famous all over Rajasthan for its singers. No celebration was complete without Sukhiya Kaka's sweet songs. Today he had been invited to village Jhalaura.
Sukhiya Kaka twirled his big moustache and set off.He was singing raag Malhar....Come to me o rolling clouds...
Suddenly, he heard, dhupp dhupp dhupp dhupp!Was someone giving a beat to his song?Dinoo, the dinosuar came running towards him. Sukhiya Kaka was so happy to see him!
You don't get such a BIG listener every day!... Come to me o rolling clouds, shower me with lovely rain!Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo sang a duet and did a little jig to keep time.
The clouds just had to listen to them!Lightning flashed and the wind danced. Dark clouds came rolling in. Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo laughed with joy.
As the rain came pouring down, Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo shared a small umbrella. Then off they went to Jhalaura following the smell of yummy pakoras, singing...O thank you for the lovely rain...O..la la la.
Dear Reader,Have you ever seen a dinosaur?Do you think they would have sung songs?What do you like to do in the rain?What do you like to eat when it rains?
#6FrameStoryChallenge: A Carnival of ArtThe illustrations in this book were created as part of the #6FrameStoryChallenge, an online campaign run by Pratham Books to build a rich bank of illustrations for StoryWeaver. The essence of the #6FrameStoryChallenge was to tell a good story using just 6 illustrations.  The campaign inspired nearly 70 illustrators to donate their time and skills to India’s first open-source story-publishing platform for children. What started out as an experimental campaign soon blossomed into a carnival of art, birthing nearly 500 new illustrations.These wordless narratives cut across language barriers, opening up a world of possibilities, encouraging StoryWeaver’s growing community to dream up multiple stories around these images. The #6FrameStoryChallenge is a powerful reminder of the need for collaboration, to get closer to our mission: “A Book in Every Child’s Hand.”
Why is the baby crying?
I think she is hungry.
Why is the boy sad?
I think he is missing his father.
Why is the girl happy?
She has a new dress.
Why is the old man laughing?
He read a good joke.
Why is the lady smiling?
Her children are reading quietly.
What is this lady feeling?
I think she is feeling shy.
First, I will build a bridge. After that, I will build a very tall tower. And then, I will build the longest roadin the world. It will start at my roomand go right up to the moon!When I build these structures,I will be a civil engineer.
I will build engines too.Some engines will be in rocketsand some will bein planes.The plane will take us from country to country and the rocket will fly us all the way to Mars.My Anaideo* will come with me on all my trips!When I build flying engines,I will be an aerospace engineer.*Anaideo means grandmotherin Assamese.
But I won’t stop at that.I will produce electricity from small particles.One tiny particle will light up our whole village.Anaideo will be so happy that she will throw a big feast!When I make power like that, I will be a nuclear engineer.
I will build a machine to clean the sea.And another to clean the air.The animals will be healthyand people will breathe easy.I will save the earthwith my machines!When I make machinesto clean the planet,I will be an environmental engineer.
I will build a new ear for Pempem(she lost it in a fight... grrrr).Then I will build a new set of teeth for Anaideo.Finally, I will build wings for me!When I build artificial body parts,I will be a biomedical engineer.And I will soar over theworldlooking for more things to build.
Roja is sad. Amma is going to work.“I will be back before bedtime, kannamma,” says Amma.
“But at what time?” asks Roja.“At exactly 9 o’clock tonight,” replies Amma. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 6 o’clock in the morning.
“I want Amma to give me milk. Not you!” says Roja to Appa. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 8 o’clock in the morning.
“Let’s buy potatoes, Thaatha!” says Roja.“But we had potatoes just yesterday. How about brinjal today?” Thaatha asks. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 10 o’clock in the morning.
“Paati, let’s eat. Thaatha is making pappadam!” Roja yells. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 1 o’clock in the afternoon.
Honk! Honk! Roja’s Akka is back from school.“Paati says I will go to school with you after this summer. Won’t that be fun, Akka?” says Roja, excitedly. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 3 o’clock in the afternoon.
“It’s time to go home, Roja,” Appa calls out.“Just one last time!” shouts Roja. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 5 o’clock in the evening.
“Selvi, eat your dosai quickly! Only then will you become big and strong,” says Roja. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is 7 o’clock at night.
“And so, when the cap-seller threw down his cap, the monkeys threw their caps down too… ”
“AMMMAAAA!” Roja shouts. “What did you do all day, Roja?” Amma asks. Tick tock! Tick tock! It is almost 9 o’clock at night.
“I had a lot of fun today, Amma!  Appa fed me breakfast.  I bought brinjal with Thaatha.  He made pappadam for lunch.
I picked up Akka from the school van.I played in the park.I fed Selvi dinner.Appa told me a story and now you are back!” Roja says, with a wide smile.
Tick tock! Tick tock!It is 9 o’clock at night!
My Day Here are some things that Roja does at different times of the day.What did you do at the same time yesterday? Draw pictures of yourself doing these different things on a piece of paper.1. Roja eats breakfast at 8 o’clock. What did you do at 8 o’clock yesterday?2. Roja goes shopping at 10 o’clock. What did you do at 10 o’clock yesterday?3. Roja eats lunch at 1 o’clock. What did you do at 1 o’clock yesterday?
4. Roja picks up Akka from the school van at 3 o’clock. What did you do at 3 o’clock yesterday?5. Roja plays in the park at 5 o’clock. What did you do at 5 o’clock yesterday?6. Roja feeds Selvi at 7 o’clock. What did you do at 7 o’clock yesterday?
Sringeri Srinivas was having a very bad day.Nobody wanted the sweet, ripe bananas he was growing on his farm.
Not his family.Not his neighbour.Not his friends.
Not the traders who could sell the bananas in far away markets. And not even his cows!
“No, thank you,” they all said. “The bananas are very sweet but we have had too many. We cannot eat any more!”
Poor Sringeri Srinivas!What was he to do now with his rich harvest of bananas?
He decided to seek help from the Farmer's Centre in Doddooru, a big town near his village
Off he went carrying the best crop of bananas.Surely someone there would have a good idea for him.
A few days later, Sringeri Srinivas returned home looking very happy. He went back to growing bananas on his farm.
But he did not offer the fruits to anyone anymore.
Not to his family.Not to his neighbour.Not to his friends.
Not to the traders who could sell the bananas in far away markets. And not even to his cows!
Everyone became very curious.Where were all the bananas going?
One day, neighbour Shivanna arranged a very big pooja.
The priest asked him to get 108 ripe bananas as an offering to the gods.
Shivanna ran to Sringeri Srinivas. “I’m sorry for saying no to you before, but now I need 108 ripe bananas.Can you help me, please?”
Sringeri Srinivas tapped his chin. “Well, my crop has just been cut but let me see what I can do. You may start your pooja. I will surely come.”
The pooja started.The whole village came to watch.The priest began chanting.
Soon it became time to offer bananas to the gods.
Just then, in came Sringeri Srinivas carrying a big bag.
From the bag, he carefully took out 27 packets and laid them out before the holy fire. Each packet was carefully wrapped in banana leaf.
On each one was written - “High Quality Banana Halwa, S.S. Farms.” Sringeri Srinivas offered one to the priest.
“Each one has the pulp of 4 bananas. There are 27 packets. So here are your 108 ripe bananas!”
The priest was so surprised that he forgot to chant. In the silence, one child began to laugh.
Soon the whole village was laughing and clapping.
Now we know what Sringeri Srinivas does with all the bananas that he grows!
DID YOU KNOW?Facts About Bananas The word banana is derived from the Arabic word for ‘finger’. India is the largest producer of bananas in the world. There are over 120 edible varieties of bananas grown here. The National Research Centre on Bananas in Trichy has a collection of 1120 banana varieties! Bananas are high in minerals that help increase brain power. Bananas make students more active and alert. Many Indian sweets are made out of bananas - Banana Payasam in Kerala, Banana Rasayana in Karnataka, Banana Halwa, Rawa Kela-Gur Mithai. Do you know some more?
In the busy city,  far away from a caring life at home,  lived a group of homeless boys. They welcomed each day just as it came. On one morning,  the boys were packing their mats after sleeping on cold pavements. To chase away the cold they lit a fire. Among the group of boys was Magozwe. He was the youngest.
When Magozwe's parents died,  he was only five years old. He went to live with his uncle. This man did not care about the child. He did not give Magozwe enough food. He made the boy do a lot of hard work.
If Magozwe complained or questioned,  his uncle beat him. When Magozwe asked if he could go to school,  his uncle beat him and said,  "You're too stupid to learn anything." After three years of this treatment Magozwe ran away from his uncle. He started living on the street.
Street life was difficult and most of the boys struggled daily just to get food. Sometimes they were arrested,  sometimes they were beaten. When they were sick,  there was no one to help. The boys survived from begging, and selling plastics and other recycling.
One day while Magozwe was looking through the dustbins,  he found an old tattered storybook. He cleaned the dirt from it and put it in his sack. Every day after that he would take out the book and look at the pictures. He did not know how to read the words.
The pictures told the story of a boy who grew up to be a pilot. Magozwe would daydream of being a pilot. Sometimes,  he imagined that he was the boy in the story.
It was cold and Magozwe was standing on the road begging. A man walked up to him. "Hello,  I'm Thomas. I work at a place where you can get something to eat," he said. Thomas pointed to a house nearby. "I hope you will go there to get some food?" he asked. Magozwe looked at the man,  and then at the house. "Maybe," he said,  and walked away.
Over the months that followed,  the homeless boys got used to seeing Thomas around. He liked to talk to people,  especially people living on the streets. Thomas listened to the stories of people's lives. He was patient and respectful. Some of the boys started going to the yellow house to get food.
Magozwe was sitting on the pavement looking at his picture book when Thomas sat down next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a pilot," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "I don't know,  I can't read," said Magozwe.
When they met,  Magozwe began to tell his own story to Thomas. It was the story of his uncle and why he ran away. Thomas didn't talk a lot,  and he didn't tell Magozwe what to do,  but he always listened carefully.
Around Magozwe's tenth birthday,  Thomas gave him a new storybook. It was a story about a village boy who grew up to be a famous soccer player. Thomas read that story to Magozwe many times,  until one day he said,  "I think it's time you went to school and learned to read. What do you think?" Thomas explained that he knew of a place where children could stay,  and go to school.
Magozwe thought about this new place,  and about going to school. What if his uncle was right and he was too stupid to learn anything? What if they beat him at this new place? He was afraid. "Maybe it is better to stay living on the street," he thought.
He shared his fears with Thomas. Over time the man reassured the boy that life could be better at the new place.
And so Magozwe moved into a house and shared the room with two other boys. There were ten children living at that house. Along with Auntie Cissy and her husband,  three dogs,  a cat,  and an old goat.
Magozwe started school and it was difficult. He had a lot to catch up. Sometimes he wanted to give up. But he thought about the pilot and the soccer player in the storybooks. Like them,  he did not give up.
Magozwe was sitting in the yard at the house where he stayed,  reading a storybook from school. Thomas came up and sat next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a teacher," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "His name is Magozwe," said Magozwe with a smile.
Chicken and Millipede were friends. But they were always competing. One day, they decided to play football to see who was the best player.
They went to the football field and started their game. Chicken was fast, but Millipede was faster. Chicken kicked far, but Millipede kicked further. Chicken started to feel angry.
They decided to play a penalty shoot-out. First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede dribbled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she lost. She was a very bad loser. Millipede started laughing because his friend was making such a fuss.
Chicken was so angry that she opened her beak wide and swallowed Millipede.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Mother Millipede asked, "Have you seen my child?" Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. "Help me mom!" cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked around and listened carefully. The voice came from inside the chicken.
Mother Millipede shouted, "Use your special power my child!" Millipedes can make a bad smell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill.
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed. And coughed. Millipede tasted disgusting!
Chicken coughed until she coughed out Millipede. Mother Millipede and her child crawled up a tree to hide.
From that time, all chickens and millipedes were enemies.
It is Rani's first day at school.Her mother is holding her hand and walking her to school."I am grown up now", Rani says to her mother. "Let go my hand, let go!"Her mother holds her hand even more tightly.
There were many children reaching the school already.Some children came by bus, by car, some by rickshaw, cycle.And some came by walking, just like Rani.
Rani and her mother reached the school gate, and her mother let go off her hand.Her mother stays at the gate. Now Rani has to go inside alone.There are many new faces all around her.
She takes one step, then another. She looks back, her mother was getting smaller and smaller as she walks away. She thinks. will my mother disappear and feels scared so runs back to her.She doesn't feel so grown up and holds her mother's hand and says "Don't go away".
All the students were inside by now, Rani was the only one outside.The teacher comes out and smiles at Rani. Rani smiles back at her teacher and let go off her mother's hand. Her mother says, "Rani, I will be here when you come out."Her mother waves to her and goes away.
Rani went inside. She was now happy, her mother will be there after school!
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
Sonu wore a blue shirt after his bath. Monu and Rina wore blue socks.
Oh,we are all dressed in the same colour today!Come, let us see some other colours!
Hereare Dadi's red chillies, don't touch them!
Aha,Bholu is cutting purple brinjals.
Rani Didi has sunshineyellowlemons.
Colours are fun to see. Now toeat something colourful too! Yummy! Should we eat a pink chuski?
Or a creamy white kulfi?
We can drink tangy greenjaljeera.
Or we can have sweet browndates?
But Ramu's guavas are thebest.
Green on the outside,pinkinside, with pure white salt and red chilli powder!
Masinyane uKhosi wafikelwa umcabango.“Umfula! Ngizoyobhukuda emfuleni, pho ngizohamba nobani lokhu umama ethe ngingalokothi ngihambe ngedwa?” kuzindla uKhosi.Kulowomzuzwana kwadlula uMama uSophie ethwele izimpahla elibhekise emfuleni.
“Ehene! Ngizolandela uMama uSophie, ngiye naye Emfuleni,” kusho uKhosi ekhuluma yedwa.Washo ngejubane emva kukamama uSophie, “Ngicela ukuya nawe Emfuleni,” kuncenga u Khosi. Umama Sophie wancekuza ikhanda emoyizela.Kuthe besahamba balandelwa nguNozipho obengakuthandi ukubhukuda kodwa ethanda ukubukela abangane bakhe bebhukuda.
“Namhlanje ngizobhukuda emanzini ajulile, habe! Angiseyona ingane mina, ngizobamangalisa bonke,” kusho uKhosi.Wagxumela emanzini ngokushesha…waya phansi, wenyuka, waphinde washona phansi ezabalaza ukukhipha ikhanda ngaphezu kwamanzi.Kwenzeka konke lokhu uNozipho ubhekile esokhalweni lomfula.
Kwabonakala sengathi wonke umuntu osemanzini uyakuthokozela ukubhukuda, kwazise lalibalele nasebukhweni bezinja.Kwakuzalele ihlokohloko emanzini engekho olalele omunye.Babememezana bethokozile impela.
Uthe ebhekisisa uNozipho wabona ukubhukuda angakwejwayele.UKhosi wabonakala ekude nakwezinye izingane enzansi nomfula.Wasondela ebhekisisa lensambatheka. Wethuka, wagijima alibangise kwabesifazane ababegeza izingubo emfuleni.“Sizani bo! Yelekelelani nangu!” uNozipho eminza.
Ngokuphazima kweso umama Sophie wagxumela emanzini, ngesivinini esikhulu.Wacwila, wavumbuka, waphinda wacwila waze wafinyelela kuKhosi.Wathi ukufika kuye wamuthi xhasi! Ngesandla ephuma naye emanzini.Waphuma naye emanzini esembelethe emhlane.
Washeshisa, edlula isigejane sezingane nabesifazane ababelila belilela uKhosi enyuka elibhekise emzini.UNozipho wayethe ne! ezithendeni zika mamaSophie owayebelethe umngane wakhe emhlane belibangise emtholampilo.
Emthalampilo bahlangatshezwa ngumhlengikazi UNoxolo owabaphuthuma ngosizo.Abanye abahlengikazi baphuthuma besizana nomhlengikazi uNoxolo ekuhlengeni impilo kaKhosi.“Uphephile, sinenhlanhla ngoba akazange abe semanzini isikhathi eside.”
Umama Sophie waphefumula njengomuntu owayethukile kakhulu kodwa osethole ithemba.Bonke abebekhona emtholampilo bamncoma ngesibindi sakhe.“Ngiyabonga ukuba sethubeni lokusindisa impilo,” esho ngokuzithoba.
Indaba yafika masinyane enkudleni yesigodi. Induna yathumela kwbizwa umama Sophie.Induna yalalela ngesineke umama Sophie eyilandisa ngokufunda kwakhe ukuhlamba waze waba yinhlambi evelele.“Ngisenyintomazanyana umnane wami wayehlala ngapheseya komfula. Umfula lo wawuyinxenye yempilo yethu. Saihlangana khona sikhe amanzi, sigeze izimpahla sibhukude futhi,” umama Sophie etshela induna.
Induna yakhipha isinqumo sokuklomelisa umama Sophie ngenxa yesenzo sakhe sobuqhawe.Abesifazana ballilizela, aesilisa bashaya ikhwela, izingane nazo zamemeza ngentokozo.Kusukela lolosuku izingane zazithanda ukulandela umama Sophie lapho eya khona.Ubungezwa zicula, “Angesabi lutho, ngigabe ngomama uSophie, iqhawekazi lethu!”
A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly, they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But, she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
The dog said, "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said, "Make the bed for  me!" Nozibele answered, "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed, or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said, "Nozibele, today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone, Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back, he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele, where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here, under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here, behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here, in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
Hi! I am Neema. Just like you, I love to eat. Here are are some things that I eat: Dhokla , Panipuri and Jalebi.
Yum Yum! Where is this noise coming from? Oh! it's Neema who is eating.
Neema loves mangoes.
She loves all fruits.
It is raining. What is Neema doing? Let us see.
Oh! Neema is eating jamuns, pineapples and corn.Yummy! She says.
Oh! it is winter.Let us see what Neema is doing.
Oh! Neema is eating custard apple , beetroot and imlis
Neema loves to eat. Just like us.
Long, long ago, Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind were fighting.
The trouble was that Sun wanted to shine the whole day. Moon wanted to shine her light every day. Rain wanted to rain every day, and Wind wanted to blow every day. They didn't want to give each other a chance.
They decided to sit together and talk about it. Sun asked Moon, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Moon answered, "I shine at night so that the animals can hunt."
Moon asked Rain, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Rain answered, "I give the earth water so that the trees and plants can grow well. I give water for animals to drink."
Rain asked Wind, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Wind answered, "I sweep the earth clean. I scatter the rain over the whole earth."
Wind asked Sun, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Sun answered, "I give the earth light and warmth, so that animals and plants can live."
Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind listened carefully to each other.
Then Sun said, "It is true that each of us helps the earth in our own special way." "Yes", said Moon, "Not one of us is better than the others." "We can work together," said Rain. Wind said, "Then let us share the days." They all agreed.
And that is why you sometimes see the moon when the sun is shining. And sometimes you feel the wind when it is raining. Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind work very well together. They understand each other.
Do you like the sun, moon, the rain or the wind? Draw the one you like best.
The wind roars. It roars past our home.
The wind is powerful. It tears my kite from my hand.
I run after my kite. The wind blows me away from the kite!
The wind becomesa tornado. It carries my kite higher and higher.
The tornado swallows me up! I see nothing, I touch nothing.
Where is my kite now? Perhaps it is caught in a tree.
Perhaps my kite is still flying in the sky.
The wind finally dies down. I am still spinning.
When I stop spinning I look around. Where did the wind go?
I cannot see my kite anywhere. I cannot hear the wind anymore.
Perhaps tomorrowI will find my kite.
Now, I must go home, before the wind starts to roar again.
Rabbit was sleeping under an apple tree. An apple fell down from a branch.
A voice said, "Run Rabbit run!" She woke up quickly and ran away with great speed.
She met Chicken. "Why are you running?" asked Chicken. Rabbit replied, "I don't know. I just heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Chicken was frightened. She started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They met Dog. Dog asked, "Why are you running?" Chicken said, "I don't know. I just heard what Rabbit said, and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Dog was surprised about what she heard. She started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
They met Horse. Horse asked Dog, "Why are you running?" Dog said, "I don't know. I just heard what Chicken said, and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Horse started to run with the others.
They met Donkey. Donkey asked, "Why are you running?" Horse replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Dog said, and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
So Donkey starts running too.
They met Cow. Cow asked, "Why are you running?" Donkey replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Horse said, and she doesn't know. She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit  said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cow was worried and starte to run as well.
They met Cat. Cat asked, "Why are you running?" Cow replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Donkey said, and he doesn't know. He heard what Horse said and she doesn't know. She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cat started running with the other animals.
Then they met the boy riding the bicycle and he asked, "Why are you running?'' And the animals replied, "We don't know. We heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
The boy laughed and said, "An apple fell off the tree because of the wind. I'm the one who said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
I like to read.
Who can I read to?Let me check one by one.
My sister is sleeping.
Who is free?
My mother and grandmother are cooking.
Who can I read to?What my father and grandfather are doing?
They are repairing car.
Idea!I can read to myself.
One day my Brother and I were walking near the  road.
A big truck was driving down the mountain.
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Namu and her brother are ready for school.
Namu carries her brother on her bicycle.
Their friends cheer for them as they ride into school.
While they are in the classroom,  a monkey arrives outside. The monkey rides away on Namu's bicycle!
The children chase the monkey.
The monkey leaves the bicycle under a tree.
The monkey swims to an island in the middle of the lake. He climbs high into a tree.
The monkey waves goodbye! The children wave back. Namu has her bicycle again.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
Every time I take a warm shower, water feels cold on my body. Who does this ? It's the wind, of course !
The milk in my cup is very hot. But when it reaches my throat, it is cold.Who did that ? Of course, it is the air around us !
There is a curtain behind the window and the curtain is moving.The wind is brushing against my face.Who does that ?  Wind, of course !
I can see the clouds in the sky and they are moving towards me.I can hear the thunder and see the lightning in the sky.Who does that ?  Wind, of course !
Branches of tree are bending. Leaves are moving.Flowers are dropping from the plants to the ground.Who does this ?  Wind, of course !
I am playing outside the house but I smell something that's sweet.My mother is making sweets.Why do I get that smell ? Because of the wind, of course !
There was a glass on the window sill, it fell down all of a sudden.The glass broke into hundred pieces.I swear, I didn't break it.Because of the wind, it fell down and broke !
I can hear the sound of a train coming.Chuku....buku.....I can't see the train but I can hear it coming.Why because of the wind I can hear the sound.
You can't see it, it won't talk.
But it does a lot of work.Who ? The wind.
I  wonder if  there's another me somewhere in the  world. THOUGHTS  FOR  YOUR  CHILD What do you think – is there another animal just like this one, somewhere in the world? There are five trees in this picture. If you take away the one tree on one side, how many trees are left on the other side?
Who looks  the same. THINK ABOUT THE FOLLOWINGWhen you look in a mirror, or a reflective surface like this  water, you see a reflection of your image. An image that has one side that looks like the reflection  of the other side is said to be symmetric. Most people's faces are very close to being symmetric. Do you see some things in your room that are symmetric?
And  talks  the  same. ACTIVITIESThis animal is listening to its echo across a canyon.  Have you ever been someplace where you can hear  an echo? Does your echo sound exactly like you, or is it different somehow?
who even has curls just like mine. ACTIVITIESThe hippo and the mouse both have a tail that is  curled, but they are certainly not the same as our friend. Describe some ways that those two animals are  different from our friend. Pick someone you know, and describe some ways that you are similar to them and different from them.
Someone with eyes and ears like mine. ACTIVITIESThis animal has 3 eyelashes on each side. How many eyelashes is that all together?
Who even laughs just like me. MORE ACTIVITIES TO DOCan you make sounds like some of the animals?  Can you neigh like a horse?Oink like a pig?Meow like a cat, or bray like a donkey?
Who can do what I can do.....THINGS YOUR CHILD DOESThey are so happy running along together. Do you feel happy when you are running freely in a big open  space like that? Do you prefer to run with someone or by yourself? They are running by some rocks. How many rocks are there? There are two big rocks near the path. If you take the big rocks away, how many rocks are left?
...and can't do what I can't do.DIFFICULT THINGS TO DOWhy are the animals having trouble peeling a banana?  Can you peel a banana easily? Are there things, such as fruit or packages, that you  have trouble opening?
I've looked and looked everywhere to find another  me. I went down to the park and looked behind the  trees. THINGS THAT YOUR CHILD WONDERS ABOUTWhat animal did he see when he looked behind the tree? Why was it another animal just like him? Is that what he was looking for?
I looked up and down, left and right and all around.WHAT DOES YOUR CHILD THINK?That first picture is just silly. How would that animal  ever climb to the top of a tree? Do you think the bird is surprised to see it there?
I looked at every animal I found.CAN YOUR CHILD ADD NUMBERS?There are three animals on one side of the pond and  one more on the other side.  If you put them all together, how many animals are there at the pond? Similarly, if you remove the one animal on one side of the pond from the group of four animals that are  at the pond, how many animals are left?The two facts – that 3 + 1 = 4 and 4  – 1 =  3 – are tied together and are called a math fact family.
I couldn't find anywhere, anybody who looked just like me.WHAT DOES YOUR CHILD THINK?Do you think his shadow temporarily fooled him into thinking that there was another animal just like him?Does your shadow look like you? Have you ever seen someone's shadow and thought  that the shadow was really a person?
There's only one me in the world! I am very special you see.DIFFERENCES IN ANIMALSHow many animals can you count in this picture?Describe some of the ways that each one of them is different from our friend.
But I am not the only special one. There is only one of you too!EACH PERSON IS UNIQUEDo you know someone who is very similar to you? Perhaps they are the same age or the same height,  or perhaps their hair is similar to yours.  Despite the similarities, they are probably not exactly the same as you.
Malela village was surrounded by hills. Many snakes lived in the forest on those hills. The biggest snake was called python by the villagers. Python scared many people. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, three sisters, Mutale, Mutinta and Mabvuto went to the forest to fetch firewood. The girls' grandmother warned, "Beware of Python the big snake. Do not take anything from the forest except the wood."  Only Ajoh did not pay attention to her grandmother.
The girls packed milk, bananas, sweet potatoes and water. They took ropes for tying firewood and a sharp dagga for chopping the wood. Then they left for the forest.
On the way, the sisters chatted and laughed. Suddenly,  Mutale, the eldest of them, said, "Be quiet. We are coming to where Unyalego the snake lives."
Mabvuto called to the others, "Look, here are Python's golden teeth. Let us take them."  Mutale reminded them, "Don't forget grandmother's warning. We must not take anything from the forest except firewood."
Mutinta said, "I don't trust grandmother. She said that to stop us having what we want. I want the golden teeth." Her sisters were worried, but Mutinta did not care.
At that moment Python came looking for his golden teeth. He was furious when he could not find the teeth. Then python heard the girls chatting and laughing. He hid under a rock next to the road where the girls would pass on their way back.
The sisters were going home carrying their firewood. Suddenly, they heard, "Hssssss!" There was Python with his mouth wide open, ready to bite. The girls were terrified.
Python asked the girls, "Who took my golden teeth?" No one answered. Python decided to test the girls. "Whoever is innocent,  will be able to sing well. She will go home with her wood. But the guilty one will sing badly. And I will eat her!"
Mutale started to sing with a clear voice, "It was not me,  it was not me who took the teeth. The one who took is still behind." Then Mabvuto sang the song. She also sang well.
Lastly, it was Mutinta's turn. She was scared. She started singing. It  sounded terrible and the words were wrong. Python shouted, "Can't you sing properly like the others?" Python knew that Mutinta took his golden teeth.
Python opened his huge jaws and swallowed Mutinta. Her sisters ran back to the village. They told everyone the story of what happened. "I warned her, if only she had listened," the girls' grandmother said sadly.
'Wov! What a lovely raincoat!' Mannu danced happily holding the shining red raincoat that his parents had bought for him.'Mamma, may I wear the raincoat now?' Manu asked his mother.Mamma said, 'No, my child. You can wear it when it rains. It should start raining soon. But as of now I don't see any signs of the rain.'
But, Monday was a bright sunny day, full of golden sunshine.Mannu looked out of the window every now and then and asked his mother,'Mamma, will it rain today?'Mamma  peeped out of the window and said, ' I don't think it will rain today. You cannot wear the raincoat today. People will laugh at you, if you do.'
On Tuesday also Mannu kept looking at the sky. And the raincoat was kept right next to him, ready to be used. But the sky was a nice blue and as bright as it was on Monday.Mannu was disappointed,'Mamma, when will I be able to use the raincoat?''There is just a single cloud in the sky today, and that too a white one. I don't think you will get a chance to wear the raincoat today.'Mamma said.
Wednesday again was a very hot sunny day.Mannu was getting worried, 'Mamma, why is it not raining yet?'He tried to put the raincoat on at home. But had to immediately take it off because he felt too hot in it.Mamma, in her eagerness to comfort him said, 'I think it will rain soon, probably by afternoon.'
On Thursday, there was the school picnic. Mannu was eager to show off the raincoat to his school buddies.'Mamma, shall I carry the raincoat to the picnic. What if it rains there?' Mannu asked.'Don't, my pet. It will not rain today. See those white clouds? And they are also so far away.' Mamma tried to comfort him.
And... at last  on Friday, the sky looked quite dark with black clouds. Mannu kept the raincoat ready at hand.'Mamma, it will rain today, right mamma?' Mannu asked excitedly. The peacock also seemed to think so and started dancing. The tortoise came out of it's hiding and looked up at the sky hoping perhaps to feel cooler after the hot summer.'I think so. Today the sky is full of black clouds.' Mamma smiled at Mannu's excitement and was happy for him.
On the Saturday morning there was a loud thunder.  And also lightening.'Mamma, it that not lightening? Now it will surely rain, right Mamma?' asked Manu.He ran out on the lawns and saw that a frog and a tortoise also had come out of their hiding.
And.. tip...tap...tip...tap... came down the raindrops!Mannu, loved the rains...raincoat or no raincoat.'Oh, it is raining; it is raining.' Thus shouting  Mannu ran out of the house and started  jumping and dancing in the rain. And he had the company of the frog who also seemed to be  waiting for the rains.
'Wait Mannu, wait.' Mamma ran after him with his raincoat in her hand. 'You forgot your raincoat!'But Mannu was very happy getting drenched in rains. The raincoat which he was holding close to himself all this time was all forgotten.
This is a fat king.
The fat king has a thin dog.The fat king and his thin dog go for a walk.
The dog sees a bird.The dog runs after the bird.
The king runs after the dog.
They run and run.They run and run for many days.
The king catches the dog.
Now the fat king is thin.
Now the fat king is thin.
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie, Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can seethe huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing."There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone, I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes, 12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says."I like counting in 4s," says Duksie, "it's quicker." "I'm goingto count in 3s, just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look, there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did youpack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asksthe children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side, to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see, how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself, "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen andget a surprise forthe children!"
Back at the farm, Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them, "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what shemight bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of apples falls onto the table. "See, I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children, "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. They count: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 1 apple left over. Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next, they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted. "Yay!" shout the children."
I wake up and make fire.
I boil some water.
I chop the firewood.
I stir the pot.
I sweep the floor.
I wash the dishes.
When my brother is busy playing!
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
"I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf," cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
"If I do not have water, I will die," cried Little Ant. "I must go to the river I heard about."
"The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away," warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. "I will die if I don't drink some water."
So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
"Help me someone. Help me please!" he called.
"Quick, climb on," said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
White Dove saved Little Ant from drowning in the river.
"I will stay here until I can thank the dove," decided Little Ant. "I will wait until she comes back to drink."
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
"There is a big white dove that comes here to drink," said one boy.
"Let's kill it and have it for supper tonight," said the other boy.
"I cannot let the boys kill White Dove," thought Little Ant. "But I am so tiny, what can I do?"
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
The naughty boys got ready to shoot White Dove.
Little Ant had an idea.
Little Ant jumped onto one boy's foot. He bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. "Ouch!" he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Mother, Father and Laraba are talking about how to stay healthy.
Laraba asked at school, "Why must we wash our hands?"
Teacher said, "Our hands have germs on them, but you can't see germs."
"Germs are very tiny. We need a microscope to see them."
Laraba looked through the microscope.She saw the germs from her hand.
"Viruses and bacteria are types of germs.Germs can make us sick."
"Washing hands stops viruses and bacteria from spreading," said Teacher.
Father is making a tool for washing hands.
Laraba asks, "How does this tool work?"
"The wooden step tilts the container, and water flows out."
"Wash with soap and water. Slowly count to 20 while you wash."
"Clever Dad! Now, can you greet with your elbow?"
One day a rat saw a Biiigggg Bun... "Ah, ha... what a lovely feast. Let me take this to my hollow," she said.
She pushed the bun from the back. AAAAeeeeee!!!huh!!!It did not move.
The Rat pushed the bun from forward. Did it move? Oh, not at all!
The Rat pushed the bun from right. Oh no, still the same.
The rat ran and pushed the bun from the left. Did it dare to move? no, not at all!!
"Isn't this crazy" the rat thought. "Let me tie a thread and then move, may be" jumped the rat.
The rat came out with a thread, within no time.  She tied the bun with a long piece of thread and,...now started to pull!
"Ah, i can't" cried the tired rat. But, she has an idea!"Umm, But let me just eat it here," she said and bit a piece of bun. "Yummm, so tasty", she said. She ate two pieces now. And, ate a bit more. And, few more too. It ate so much that the size of the bun is now small!!
The rat started pushing the bun again. The eatery just slipped to the hollow. "Ah! Finally, it is in"The rat just couldn't stop grinning. But, Oh, ho!! Now, the rat's stomach is full!
The rat tried to get into the hollow. But, she just can't!!
The rat sits outside the hollow. Her stomach is so full that, she just cannot enter the hollow!! "Huh, i ate too much," the rat cried.
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
“I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf,” cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
“If I do not have water, I will die,” cried Little Ant. “I must go to the river I heard about.”
“The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away,” warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. “I will die if I don't drink some water.” So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
“Help me someone. Help me please!” he called.
“Quick, climb on,” said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
“I will stay here until I can thank the dove,” decided Little Ant. “I will wait until she comes back to drink.”
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
“There is a big white dove that comes here to drink,” said one boy. “We will have it for supper tonight.”
“I cannot let the boys kill White Dove,” thought Little Ant. “But I am so tiny, what can I do?”
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
Little Ant had an idea.
He jumped onto one boy's foot. Little Ant bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. “Ouch!” he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Ball.
My ball.
My red ball.
My big red ball.
I kick.
I kick my ball.
I kick my red ball.
I kick my red ball hard!
Where?
Where is my ball?
Where is my ball now?
Where is my red ball now?
It is up.
It is high up.
It is high up in the sky.
It is high up in the sky. It is over the moon. It is gone!
My little brother sleeps late. I wake early,  because I am great!
I am the one who lets in the sun.
"You're my morning star," says Ma.
I wash myself every day,  I don't need any help.
I don't mind cold water, or the blue soap that washes clothes.
Ma reminds,  "Don't forget your teeth." I reply,  "Never,  not me!"
After washing,  I greet Grandpa and Auntie. I wish them a good day.
Then I dress myself.  "I'm big now, Ma," I say.
I can close my buttons and buckle my shoes.
I make sure my brother knows all the school news.
In class I do my best in every way.
I do all these good things every day. But the thing I like most,  is to play and play!
I love my teacher.
She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She has braided her hair so nicely.
She has put colourful beads in her hair.
Her beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, please would you braid my hair like my teacher's?
When I am older I will put beads in my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
zama is getting ready for school.
Papa is preparing porridge﻿.
He wished he would get porride from mmother
Porridge will give him energy
Here you go.
He adds milk in the porridge.
He finished his porridge quickly
Finish it quickly
there was a lot left
they added salt into the porridge
OH, papa give him too much porridge
WDad, when will mom come home? asked zama
When the last school bell rang, all the children laughed and screamed with joy.                                                    All, except Akku. Akku was ANGRY!
"Akku! Akku! Look at the pretty sunflowers!" said Appa, as they rode   through a field."Oh no! They’re TOO YELLOW! They’re making my eyes hurt!" said Akku.
Akku! Akku! Look! Look at all the monkeys!" said Appa, pointing at the roof of their house.                              "oh no!" said Akku. Go AWAY!
"Here, drink some buttermilk," said Appa. "It’ll cool you down.""NO!" said Akku. "I DON’T WANT ANY!""Try a sip, at least?""OKAY! FINE!" said Akku, and tried a sip.It wasn’t all that bad.She had another sip.  And another.In no time, the glass was empty.
"Would you like a vada?" asked Appa.  "NO" said Akku."Just one little bite?""Okay, FINE!" said Akku, and took a bite. It  was quite good.She took another bite.And another.In no time, the plate was empty.
"Good girl," said Appa. "Now will you tell me why you’re so angry?"    "NO!" said Akku."Was it something I did?""NO!""Was it something Amma did?""NO!""Did something happened in school today?"     "MAYBE!"        "Oho."
"Would you like to draw it?" asked Appa. "Here’s a nice sheet of paper and some crayons."                                                                                                                                     "Okay, FINE!" said Akku.
Akku drew a brick… "This is the BRICK that I tripped over this morning," said Akku.                   "You’re right. That is a  brick!" said Appa.
And Akku drew a boy…"This is Bikku, The BOY who laughed at me when I fell down!" said Akku.                 "You’re right," said Appa. "He shouldn’t have laughed at you."
And Akku drew an idli…    "This is my idli," said Akku. "It fell out of my lunch box when I tripped over the BRICK!"
And Akku drew a crow…                                              "This is the CROW that flew off with my idli," said Akku.                              "The crow must have been very hungry," said Appa.
And Akku drew her teacher…"This is my teacher, Amala Miss," said Akku."She helped me up when I fell down. And then she hugged me.""That’s nice of her," said Appa."And then she patted my back and said, you would be fine. I DON’T like to be hugged and patted."Are you alright now?" I’m okay now."     "That’s good."
"See how well you draw, Akku?" said Appa."You’re a real artist! Will you draw something for Amma too?""Okay!" said Akku, and      started drawing some more. "This is a little white mouse… and this is a boat…and this is a coconut tree…"
"And this is a sunflower…and this is your cycle, Appa… and this is a dog…and this is a frog…"In no time, Akku had forgotten all about the BRICK that made her trip and fall. And about the BOY who laughed at her. And about the IDLI-CROW.And Akku even forgot about being ANGRY.
10 Things to Do If You Feel ANGRY like Akku:1. Laugh loudly and jump around with your arms in the air!2. Slowly – very, very slowly – breathe in, and breathe out!3. Drink some water! Or buttermilk!4. Eat a piece of fruit! Or a vada!5. Tell a grown-up about how you’re feeling!6. Write about how you’re feeling!7. Draw it out! Paint it!8. Play with a pile of clay!9. Make up a song about your anger! Sing it aloud!10. Do the happy dance!
Shanti and Arun were good friends. They had so much fun together.They shared secrets in class. They ran races on the way home.She was always cheerful.
One day, Shanti came into the classroom slowly. Her head was bent. She looked sad. “Did someone scold you?” asked Arun.Shanti shook her head. She sat down and did not look up. She did not answer ‘Present!’ when Sona Miss called her name. Sona Miss called again, louder this time, “Shanti Kumar!” Shanti raised her hand.
“Do you have a sore throat?” her teacher asked her. Shanti shook her head.Her cheeks were red and it looked like she had a fever.“Are you feeling okay?” Sona Miss asked.Shanti nodded, still not daring to look up.
“Why does Shanti look so sad?”“Is your little brother okay?”“Is your puppy okay?”“Is your grandmother okay?”Shanti kept nodding her head to each of her friends. But she did not look up.
Arun wanted to make her smile. He had an idea! He took out something from his bag.As he ran to show it to Shanti, it slipped out of his hands. Shanti saw something flying towards her and she grabbed it.
It was a BIG, green, rubber frog!Shanti's eyes flew open. Then she opened her mouth to laugh.THEN Arun and her friends saw why she had not smiled or talked all day!Four of her front teeth had gone missing!
I wake up at night feeling thirsty. I want to get some water. I start looking for my slippers under the bed.
Oh my God! There is a tiger under my bed.
Now what should I do?
Should I call Ma? What if the tiger roars?
Should I just go back to sleep? But I am not sleepy any more.
Then someone turns on the light. Ma is standing at the door.
“What happened dear?Did you call me?” asks Ma.
I point towards the tiger. Ma bends and pulls the tiger out from under the bed!
Hey, this is no tiger. This is my thick yellow and black sweater. Its buttons shine like a tiger's eyes.
I got scared for nothing!Ma gets me some water.
Now I will sleep. And dream about real tigers in a jungle!
a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing. The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish. They didn't saw any fish bigger than this! Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM! They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
Tulsa wishes she could visit a forest. Her teacher reads stories about tigers to the class. She loves to hear about forests and animals.
One day, her wish comes true! Khare Chacha, a senior forest official, invites Tulsa and her friends to visit a forest called Kanha Tiger Reserve. Tulsa and her friends can’t stop grinning. They will go to the forest for a whole day and a whole night!
It takes four hours by bus from the school to the forest. As soon as Tulsa gets down from the bus, a strong hand shakes her hand and then ruffles her hair. “Welcome to Kanha!” It is Khare Chacha.
Tulsa and her friends Rani, Mithu, and Dipti stay close to one another. “Sniff the air. It smells of trees and leaves!” says Mithu.“The air is clean like it has been washed with soap!” adds Rani.
It's almost sunset now. Khare Chacha and other forest officials tell them about the forest they will visit tomorrow. They play the sounds of animals and birds for the girls to hear and recognise.
PIAON! PIAON! “It’s a peacock!”OOW! OOW!“I know! It’s a barking deer.”KEEE! KEE!“That is the sound of crickets!”Next day, Tulsa wakes up at five in the morning. Brrr! It’s cold! Everyone bundles up in warm clothes. One by one, they get into the bus. “All around us there is tall grass covered in a thick blanket of fog,” Ranveer Uncle, the forest guide, tells them. Tulsa can feel the cold and pure air in her mouth. It tastes like mint leaves.
“Shhh!” Ranveer Uncle whispers. “There are two jackals right next to our bus.” Everyone listens carefully. They hear the rustling sound of the tall grass. Dried leaves crush under their feet, as the jackals run lightly into the dense forest.
Ranveer Uncle whispers again. “A big deer called sambar is standing on the left side of the road. The deer is brown and has big stem-like horns called antlers on its head.” Everyone focuses to their left. HAUNNNNK! HAUNNNK!  The sambar runs off. "Sounds like a very big horn!” says Tulsa. All the girls laugh.
Soon, the air becomes even cooler. “We are near a river now,” Ranveer Uncle says. Tulsa can hear the gurgling of the water. So many birds are calling from the trees.
FHWEEE! FHWEEE!“That one is whistling!” says Rashmi.“Yes Rashmi, that is the call of a thrush,” says Ranveer Uncle.KEEECH! KEECH!“And that screeching you hear is the call of the jungle babbler.”
Soft leaves fall from above. Baby monkeys are showering them with leaves! Tulsa picks up a leaf that falls on her. It smells fresh and pure, just like the forest.
The bus starts moving uphill. “Hold this creeper. See how it feels like a strong rope? The leaves are like cotton!” Everyone takes turns to hold the creeper. “This is the mahul,” says Ranveer Uncle. “The leaves are used to make small bowls.”
PIAONN! PIAONN!“Peacock to your right!” Ranveer Uncle is excited.
“Is he dancing?” asks Tulsa.“Yes!” Uncle says. “His feathers are shining in the winter sun and are sparking like gemstones.” “Beautiful,” says Tulsa.
By now everyone is very hungry. They stop at the forest camp for breakfast. There, Khare Chacha announces a surprise. “Some of our camp elephants are here. They won’t mind if you touch them gently.” Everyone starts squealing in delight. Soon Tulsa is led to the elephant, Tara.
The guide places her hand on Tara’s prickly stomach. Whoomp! Tulsa hears the sound of Tara’s feet moving. Tulsa can feel the powerful muscles under her hand. Trumpeting softly, Tara places her trunk in Tulsa’s hand, looking for food. Tulsa can’t stop smiling, as she feels the wet trunk. It's time to go back. On the way, they pass a gaur. “The gaur is chewing grass. The body is black but the bottoms of the legs are white. It looks like the gaur is wearing socks,” says Ranveer Uncle. Everyone laughs. Suddenly, the air is split by a call, deep and loud.
AUHN! The call comes again.“The tiger is very far,” explains Ranveer Uncle. “But he has probably seen you and wants you to know that.”
Sighing with happiness, Tulsa and her friends head out of the park. There are so many ways to experience the forest! They can't wait to come back to Kanha Tiger Reserve.
This is a real storyIn January 2017, the Last Wilderness Foundation in association with the Kanha Forest Department conducted a camp for 23 visually impaired students from the Ananya Manav Sai Samiti, Jabalpur. The students were taken on a safari and nature trail using their fabulous sensory skills to enjoy the forest.
About Last Wilderness FoundationThe Last Wilderness Foundation is an NGO that works in urban and rural areas with children to spread awareness about wildlife and biodiversity, and sensitise them towards conservation and the environment. For details, visit www.thelastwilderness.org.
Once upon a time, there were four friends and they decided to do a toy race.
﻿                  Rani has a shiny green car.         Pihu has a black and yellow auto.
﻿               ﻿Rohit has big red bus.      Aman has long blue lorry.
On your marks, get set, ready....  Go!!!!Here comes Lucky- the dog, joining the race.....
﻿ ﻿﻿Everybody staring at Lucky...                   The fastest of all..                         And so the winner is our Lucky!!!!
Khotso rides a donkey. His donkey is blue. Khotso and his donkey eat together.
Grandmother Thabo is cooking. She is cooking in a black pot. Grandmother Thabo and her cat eat together.
Neo's cow is as green as grass. The cow stands on Neo's foot. She drops her bucket of milk.
Ntate Phakane has a black horse. His horse is very strong. The horse pulls the plough all by itself.
Thabang drives his car. He travels with his dog. Thabang's dog poops in the car!
The blue donkey,  the green cow,  the black horse,  and grandmother's cat got into Thabang's car. They all started to sing.
Every day after school, Manu plays hopscotch.She jumps and counts.1, 2, and 3.4, 5, and 6.7, 8, 9, and 10.
But today Manu is feeling itchy-scratchyon her tummy. She jumps and counts.1, 2, and 3.SCRATCH!4, 5, and 6.SCRATCH! SCRATCH!7, 8, 9, and 10.SCRATCH! SCRATCH! SCRATCH!
She sees tiny itchy-scratchy bumps.1, 2, and 3.On her tummy!4, 5, and 6.On her arms!7, 8, 9, and 10.On her back!Itchy-scratchy bumps everywhere!
“You have chickenpox,” says Amma.“You cannot go to school.”
Manu plops herself on the bed and goes,SCRATCH!SCRATCH! SCRATCH!SCRATCH! SCRATCH! SCRATCH!
“Do not scratch!” says Amma.It makes Manu evenmore itchy-scratchy!
When Amma and Baba are not looking,SCRATCH!After eating porridge,SCRATCH! SCRATCH!
“Do not scratch!”yell Amma and Baba.
But when she lies onthe bed, again she goes,SCRATCH!SCRATCH! SCRATCH!SCRATCH! SCRATCH!SCRATCH!
Manu tries and tries not toSCRATCH! SCRATCH!She plays snakesand ladders.She dreams up many stories.She forgets to SCRATCH! SCRATCH!
Slowly, the bumps disappear. Manu counts.10, 9, and 8. 7, 6, and 5. 4, 3, 2, and 1.Until one day Manu pulls her shirt up.All the itchy-scratchy bumps are...GONE!
Now Manu can play hopscotch.She jumps and counts.1, 2, and 3.4, 5, and 6.7, 8, 9, and 10.
All of us went to the Dasara fair.
Papa bought Chintu fancy glasses. Mother bought me a bright blue cap. The baby got sugar candy.
On the way home, a very strong wind came.It blew my cap away.
My cap got stuck on a branch of the old Pipal tree.
I cried a lot. And I did not eat my dinner.
Later that night, the moon came up.It looked at my cap on the old Pipal tree.
It tried on my cap. The moon smiled happily. I had to smile too.
After school the next day, my mother gave me a shiny new red cap. “The moon sent it,” she said.
That night, both the moon and I wore our caps and smiled. We were happy.
Do you think the sun needs a hat?
Guess which cap I am wearing today!
I have many friends.....
My some friends are elder than me and....
some are younger than me......
And my some friends are aged like my grand father....
And some are children too....
And some friends are such who have a tail......
And some are such who doesn't have legs.....
And some are such who even fly.....
Ohhhhhh Even books are my friends......
But do you know who is my best friend.... Who??? Who???? Who????
My MOM!!!!!
Look at the animals.
The cow says, "Moo."
The goat says, "Meh,  meh."
The horse says, "Neigh."
The pig says, "Grunt."
The chicken says, "Cluck."
The dog says, "Woof."
The farmer says, "Shhh!"
His hoe* was too short.* Long gardening tool.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was tooshort.
His bicycle was short too.
This man was too tall!
He made a hoe with a very long handle.
He made very tall  door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for there happily.
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
When I talk to her, she also talks to me.
In the morning, my friend will go back into the mirror.
But I don't mind at all. We will play again in my dreams!
There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."
But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!
Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."
Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"
Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."
"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."
Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."
So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.
The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."
The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dusty car.
Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." "My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.
From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. And he tried his best not to get angry with her.Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided it wasn't worth the price to get angry and break things.
Mama is filling a red bucket.
Abongile is playing with a red truck.
Deon is holding red flowers.
Aunty is wearing a red jersey.
There is a red sun above Grandpa.
There is a red scooter parked in the street.
A red lizard is on Babalwa's lap.
A red fire engine is at the fire station.
Here is Sibahle wearing a red top.
She is trying on red boots.
They don't fit!
“Re botšeng tša bophelo bja lena bonnyaneng,” gwa botšiša Lebo.Moh. Asnath a re, “Ke belegwe ka 1979 kua Profenseng ya Limpopo, gola Afrika Borwa.Ge re gola re be re sena pompi tša meetse ka magaeng gape re šomiša kerese go dira mošomo wa sekolo.”
“Bjale lerato la go fofiša difofane le thomile neng?” gwa botšiša Lebo.“Taba yeo e be e le toro fela. Ge ke nale mengwaga ye 13, ka thoma go ba le kgahlego.Kua sekolong ka thoma go bala dimakasini tša bofofiši.Ya ba ge ke thomile,” gwa gopola Asnath.
“Bjale taba yeo ya gola bjang?” gwa botšiša Lebo a ngwala fase.“Ke be ke fela ke ipotšiša gore naa go tla bjang gore sefofane, selo se se golo, sa boima, se kgone go fofa moyeng.Ke nyaka gape go tseba gore di fofa bjang,” gwa fetola Moh. Asnath.
“Naa motho o swanetše go dira dithuto dife go ba mofofiši?” gwa botšiša Lebo.Moh, Asnath a fetola a re, “Dipalo, Saense le Boenjenere.Morago wa ithuta go fofiša sefofane lebaka le letelele pele o ka hwetša lengwalo la go ba mofofiši wa difofane.”
Lebo a re, “Naa dithuto tšeo di thuša ka eng mošomong wa lena?”Moh. Asnath a re, “Dipalo di thuša ge o hlakantšha dinomoro ka sefofaneng ge se fofa.Ka Enjenere o tseba bokagare bja sefofane go kwešiša le gore bo šoma bjang.”
“Hee, bjale ge le fofa la mathomo le be le ikwa bjang? Le be le sa tšhoga?” a realo Lebo.Moh. Asnath a re, “Hei Lebo! Ke tšere matšatši ke sellega nako ge ke fofa. Efela ka se nyame mooko.Ga bjale ke fofela nageng di šele, ke ithuta ditšo tša go fapafapana.”
“Ke tshepa le ipshina ka seo! Bjale sefofane sona se fofa bjang?” a realo Lebo.Moh. Asnath a hlaloša a re, “Moya o fofa diphegong wa kukela sefofane godimo. Maatla a go tšwa enjeneng a se iša pele, gomme sa fofa.”
“Naa mošomong wo le kopane le mathata afe?” gwa botšiša Lebo.“Ke ile ka botšwa gore ke nna yo mokopana. Ba re mosadi a ka se šome mošomo wa banna. Gape ba re dithuto tšaka ga se tša maleba tša bofofiši.”
Lebo a botšiša a re, “Naa mathata ao le a fentše bjang?”“Ke ile ka lwantšha molao wa go gana batho ba seemo sa ka. Ka thoma fase dithuto gomme ka netefatša go hwetša meputso ya godimo kudu.Ka bontšha bokgoni bja basadi,” a fetola Asnath.
Lebo a dumela gomme Asnath a tšwela pele. “Ke ithutile gore ge o šetša, o ka se palelwe.“Ke ithutile gore ge o na le maikemišetšo o ka se palelwe ke selo. Le gore o se theeletše batho ba gore o ka se kgone. Gape gore basadi ba ka dira sengwe le sengwe sa go dirwa ke banna,” gwa fetola Moh. Asnath.“Ke nnete seo!” a realo Lebo.
“Naa le ikgantšha ka eng?” gwa botšiša Lebo.Moh. Asnath a re, “Ke be ke nale mengwaga ye masomepedipedi fela ge ke fihlelela go ba mosadi wa mothomoso wa mathomo wa go fofiša difofane.Gape ke be ke le sehlopheng sa mathomo sa go fofiša sefofane re le basadi fela.Ga bjale ke hlohleletša basetsana go latela dithuto tša Saense.
Lebo a fetša ka gore, “Ke rata go le leboga ge le kgonne go boledišana le nna.Ge le kgona go bontšha rena baswa gore ka maikemišetšo, motho a ka fofela godimo!”Moh. Asnath a myemyela a re, “Le nna ke thabetše go boledišana le wena, Lebo. Thobela.
One day, Ngô-Iwa, the dog found eggs at the river.
Ngô-Iwa stole the ten eggs and put them in her bag.
Ngô-Iwa kept the eggs warm. She wanted them to hatch.
Crocodile asked Ngô-Iwa, "Have you seen my eggs?"
When Ngô-Iwa denied, Crocodile asked all animals about her eggs.
Meanwhile,  the eggs hatched one by one when Ngô-Iwa went hunting.
Ngô-Iwa could not give the young crocodiles enough food.
One day, Crocodile heard the young crocodiles crying for food!
Crocodile entered the hut and hit Ngô-Iwa with her tail.
Ngô-Iwa ran out through the window. Crocodile chased her.
Ngô-Iwa stopped and begged, "I am sorry!"
Crocodile forgave her and took her children to the river.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
“Ndzi lava ku mi hlamusela hi mungjhiniyara loyi a nga na ndhuma yo tumbuluxa. Munhu loyi u tswariwe eVondwe,” ku hlamusela Mudyondzisi Marry.“Vondwe hi le kwihi ka Mudyondzisi?” ku vutisa Lulama.“Hi le matikoxikaya ya le ka xa xifundzakulu xa Limpopo,” ku hlamula Mudyondzisi.
“Mulalo Doyoyo u tswariwile hi siku ra 13 Mhawuri 1970. A mi ri kwihi hi 1970?” ku vutisa Mudyondzisi Marry.“Mudyondzisi, a hi nga ri kona hi 1970,” ku hlamula Jack hi ku hleka.“Mulalo u sungule eVondwe hi 1977,” i mudyondzisi a yaka emahlweni.
“Loko a nghena eMbilwi, u rhandzile dyondzi ya sayense na vunjhiniyara,” ku hlamusela Mudyondzisi Marry.“Xana vunjhiniyara i yini?” ku vutisa mudyondzisi.“I sayense na thekinoloj swi hlanganile,” ku hlamula Nkoka.“I ku endla michini, miako na swilo swin’wana,” ku hlamula Kulani.
“Hinkwenu mi vulavula ntiyiso. Vanjhiniyara va tumbuluxa na ku endla michini, switirhisiwa na miako. Va tirhisa sayense na thekinoloji,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.“Endzhaku ko heta xikolo xa sekondari, Mulalo u ve a kuma nseketelo wa timali ku ya dyondza Vunjhiniyara eYunivhesiti ya Kapa,” Mudyondzisi u ya emahlweni.
“Loko a ha ri eyunivhesiti, Mualo u simeka nhlangano wa Temescial.Temescial swi yimele ‘Thekinoloji, vutshunguri na sayense swa hinkwavo.’Nhlangano wu hlohlotela vana eka dyondzo ya sayense, thekinoloji, vunghiniyara na matematiki.Hi ta kuma swo tala hi mhaka leyi.”
“Loko a heta digiri ya yena yo sungula, Mulalo u yile eAmerika. U dyondzile na ku dyondzisa kwale.U dyondzisile Sayense na Matematiki. Xana Matematiki I yini?” ku vutisa Mudyondzisi Marry.“I dyondzo ya tinhlayo, swivumbeko na tipatironi,” ku hlamula Akani.
“Hi swona sweswo wena Akani,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.Ivi a ya emahlweni na xitori xa yena.“Mulalo u endle vudokodela. Hi yona digiri ya le henhla leyi, PhD. Endzhaku ka yona u vuriwa dokodela. I mutikoti wa swa vunjhiniyara.”
“Sweswi ndzi nga si mu byela hileswi Mulalo a swi tumbuluxeke, yimani ndzi mi byela hi xitirhisiwa xo aka lexi vuriwaka semende,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.“Semende yi na maribye ma layimi lama tirhisiwaka eka miako.Ribye leri ri ceriwa emigodini, ri siriwa ri va swiphemu switsongo ivi ri hisiwa ku endla semende.”
“Vadyondzi, Mulalo u tumbuluxile xitirhisiwa xo aka lexi nga riki na maribye. Xi endliwe hi nkuma na malakatsa man’wana.Leswi swi vula leswaku swa koteka ku endla semende u nga tirhisi ribye ra layimi kusuka ehansi. Mbangu a wu vaviseki.”
“Mulalo u tlhele a tumbuluxa muchini wo endla switina lowu nga dyiki mati no tirhisa gezi ro tala. Phela mati ma kala!”“A hi fanelangi ku siya tipompi ti nga pfariwangi,” ku vula Jack.“Hi swona wena Jack. I vutihlamuleri bya hina ku hlayisa mati,” ku engetela Lulama.
“Se ndzi heta xitori xa mina hi xithuthuthu xa hayidirojeni. Mulalo u rhandza ku hlohlotela vana. Xithuthuthu xi thyiwile Ahifambeni. Mulalo u tumbuluxile xithuthuthu lexi na valavisisi van’wana,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.“Xithuthuthu xa hayidirojeni, swa tsakisa leswi! ku vula Kulani.”“Ahifambeni!” ku vula Nkoka.
“Ina, A hi fambeni hi ya endla vunjhiniyara hi tumbuluxa swilo swa kahle!” ku vula Kulani.“A hi tirhiseni Sayense na Thekinoloji ku ololoxa swiphiqo na ku tiphina!” ku vula Nkoka.“Ndza swi tiva leswaku xitori xa Mulalo xi ta mi hlohlotela!” ku vula Mudyondzisi Marry a karhi a n’wayitela.
Today is  Vasant Panchami. My parents say it is the first day of spring. Spring is the season between winter and summer. It is called Vasant Ritu in Sanskrit.
In many parts of India, people pray to the goddess of learning, music and art on this day. Many birds are sitting on the tree near my house. I think they are singing to me.
The leaves on the tree are new and shiny. Just like my new frock. Amma is also wearing a yellow sari ― such a pretty colour ‘basanti’, and such a pretty name!
Grandpa wants me to plant a tree. “But why?” I ask. “So that you will have a friend to grow up with, Meenu,” he says. “Spring is a good season to start something new.”
We go to the garden. Grandpa and I dig a hole in the ground and plant a sapling. “How tall will it grow?” I ask him.
"Wait and watch, dear Meenu!" he says. The squirrels are chasing each other. Tingu, the cat, chases a squirrel. And I want to chase Tingu.
The garden is full of flowers.I like the yellow roses the best and Grandpa likes the white jasmine.There is a carpet of leaves under some trees.
Many trees have flowers. I like spring! Everything looks so pretty in spring!
Tomorrow is Holi. School is closed for two days. We have made a huge Holika with twigs, and pieces of wood. Some of us went to the forest and brought tesu flowers. Manu put the flowers in a tank of water. The water has turned a bright orange!
Tomorrow we will play Holi with the orange water. We will get gujia and puris to eat. Spring is such a happy season. It is not cold, it is not hot, and it is not wet. I  can play all the time!
It had been raining for days, and everyone was grumpy. Everyone except Sizwe, who woke up with a smile every morning.“Yoh! Sizwe! That smile is magic!” said Gogo.“Is it for me?”Sizwe clapped his hand over his mouth.“But it’s MY smile, Gogo,” he whispered.
His mother laughed. “Sizwe! A smile is something you can give away without losing it. Look!”She lifted him up to the mirror. There was his smile, just as bright as before.
It was time to go out. Mama buttoned up Sizwe’s raincoat, and off they went, through the rain, to the library.Down the street, Sizwe’s best friend Zanele stood at the window of her house, looking sadly at the rain.Sizwe felt his smile creeping, creeping up. Before he knew it, his smile LEAPT out, and flew across the garden to Zanele.
Zanele held on tightly to the smile – it was far too precious to let it get away.As Sizwe walked away to the library, Zanele’s doorbell rang. It was the postman, with a letter from her favourite cousin.Zanele was so happy, that the smile bounced up, and beamed out at the postman.“Thank you, Mister Postman!” she said.
Zanele’s smile was the brightest thing the postman had seen all morning. It kept him warm as he trudged off through the rain.He came to a big house. Inside the gate, a dog was spinning around in circles, barking, barking, barking. He was so silly, that the postman couldn’t help smiling.The smile bounced through the gate with a glitter of glee.
The dog stopped barking. He pricked up his ears and wagged his tail. Then he turned and ran back to the house with the precious, warm smile.A bent old man opened the door. “Oh, no! You can’t come inside. You’re all wet!” he told the dog. But right away, the smile beamed up at the old man.
The old man stood a little straighter. “Eish,” he said, “Who cares if it’s raining? Let’s go for a walk, boy!” And off they went, splashing in the puddles.There, at the zebra crossing, stood grumpy Mrs Makabela, the traffic cop. She looked cold, and wet, and miserable.The old man knew just what to do. “Morning, Mrs Makabela!” he called, and smiled his biggest, brightest smile.But Mrs Makabela… did not smile back.
Standing in the rain for days can make a face sad, sad, sad.But a smile is a magical thing and, by now, the smile was so strong, and so bright, that it was very hard to keep inside.It didn’t work right away, but bit by tiny bit, it began to creep out until, at last…!A great, big smile lit up Mrs Makabela’s face!The school bell rang, and children ran to cross the road. Mrs Makabela put up her sign, and smiled, and smiled, at each and every child.
The children smiled at their moms and dads, and their gogos and tatas and brothers and sisters. They smiled at the bus driver and the greengrocer, and Mrs Makau, who went off to smile at her husband, who smiled at the mayor...The smiles leapt and rolled and beamed and gleamed until EVERYONE was smiling and giggling and laughing out loud in the rain.
In the library, everything was quiet except for the sound of the rain.“It’s time to go,” said Sizwe’s mother, closingher book.“Aw, mom!” said Sizwe, who had run out of smiles.
But as they stepped out into the street…WHAT A SIGHT!Everyone in town was there!Everyone!And they were ALL smiling!
The smiles bounced around and beamed at Sizwe. They warmed him, and tickled him, and crept up, up, up from his toes… to the TOP of his head. He was so full of happiness that the smile burst out, brilliant and beaming bright.And something changed. The dark, gloomy, rainy afternoon didn’t seem so dark anymore.Could it be…? YES!The clouds parted, and the warm sun shone down on them, with the biggest, brightest, most brilliant smile of all.
The small bus stop in my village was busy with people and overloaded buses. On the ground were even more things to load. Touts were shouting the names where the buses were going.
"City! City! Going west!" I heard a tout shouting. That was the bus I needed to catch.
The city bus was almost full,  but more people were still pushing to get on. Some packed their luggage under the bus. Others put their things on the racks inside.
New passengers clutched their tickets as they looked for somewhere to sit in the crowded bus. Women with young children made them comfortable for the long journey.
I squeezed in next to a window. The person sitting next to me was holding tightly to a green plastic bag. He wore old sandals,  a worn out coat,  and he looked nervous.
I looked outside the bus and realised that I was leaving my village,  the place where I had grown up. I was going to the big city.
The loading was completed and all passengers were seated. Hawkers still pushed their way into the bus to sell their goods to the passengers. Each one was shouting the names of what was available for sale. The words sounded funny to me.
A few passengers bought drinks,  others bought small snacks and began to chew. Those who did not have any money,  like me,  just watched.
These activities were interrupted by the hooting of the bus,  a sign that we were ready to leave. The tout yelled at the hawkers to get out.
The hawkers pushed each other to make their way out of the bus. Some gave back change to the travelers. Others made last minute attempts to sell more.
As the bus left the bus stop,  I stared out of the window. I wondered if I would ever go back to my village again.
As the journey progressed,  the inside of the bus got very hot. I closed my eyes,  hoping to sleep.
But my mind drifted back home. Will my mother be safe? Will my rabbits fetch any money? Will my brother remember to water my tree seedlings?
On the way,  I memorised the name of the place where my uncle lived in the big city. I was still mumbling it when I fell asleep.
Nine hours later,  I woke up with loud banging and calling for passengers going back to my village. I grabbed my small bag and jumped out of the bus.
The return bus was filling up quickly. Soon it would make its way back east.  The most important thing for me now,  was to start looking for my uncle's house.
“I can’t lift you up, Shanu!” says Ammi. “You are too big!”
“You can’t walk to school alone, Shanu!” says Abbu. “You are too small!”
“You can’t sleep in the baby’s cot, Shanu!” says Dadu. “You are too big!”
“You can’t carry the baby to the park, Shanu!” says Dadi. “You are too small!”
Shanu is puzzled. Too big! Too small! How can she be too big andtoo small all at once?
Too big to wear her old pink frock.Too small to make dosas at the stove.
Too big to climb up on Dadu’s back?Too smallto carry the baby on hers?
“What am I the right size for?” Shanu wonders.
Ammi smiles and says, “Why, you are just big enough to go to big school.”
“And you are just small enough for me to carry you on my shoulders,” says Abbu.
“You are just big enough to take me for my morning walks,” says Dadu.
“And you are just small enough for me to tell stories to,” says Dadi.
“And you will always, always be the perfect size...for this!" all say, and give her a warm, wonderful hug.
Once upon a time, it happened in a village that a gang of young people decided to kill all the old people. They wanted to stop the old people doing magic.
But one of the youths ran off with his father and hid him in the desert.
After he had done this, the gang began killing the old people.
Not long after, a snake came into the village from the desert.The snake entered into the stomach of a small child. It kept poking its head out of the child's mouth.
The parents of the child and all the other people tried everything to solve this problem.
But they saw that if they killed the snake it would also kill the child. Everyone kept trying different things.
Then, the young man who had hidden his father went and told him everything that had happened. And the old man replied, "That's the easiest thing in the world to take care of!"
The old man said, "Go find a toad and tie it up near the snake. The snake will come out of the child's stomach to catch the toad."The young man did just what his father said. The snake came out and started to chase the toad.
And the child was saved from death.
"Mom," calls Lebo. "Come and look. These clothes are all too small for me!" "Let me see," says Mom.
"Look at my skirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes,  it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your skirt."
"Look at my jeans. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jeans."
"Look at my T-shirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your T-shirt."
"Look at my jersey. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jersey."
"Look at my raincoat. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your raincoat."
"Look at my socks. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your socks."
"Look at my shoes. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your shoes."
"Now you have lots of clothes," says Lebo. "Oh no I don't," says Nomsa. "These clothes are all too big for me!"
Once upon a time, there was a hungry jackal. He was walking around the bush looking for food.
He came across a grapevine. He spotted a bunch of juicy ripe grapes hanging from a high branch.
"Those look really delicious," he thought. He took a few steps back so that he could make his highest jump.
The grapes were too high. Jackal fell on his back without even touching the bunch.
Jackal got up and went further back from his starting spot. He ran, and almost got high enough. But he fell even harder.
He tried again and again. But he couldn't get to the grapes. He kept falling until his back was very sore.
Finally, he gave up and walked away.
He stopped and looked back at the grapes. He was hungrier than ever. "Those grapes look really sour anyway," he thought.
Putta and Puttijumped out of bed. It was Muttajji's birthday and they had a train tocatch!
Muttajji, who wasthe twins' mother's mother's mother,  lived in Mysore with Ajji, whowas the twins' mother's mother.  No one actually knew when Muttajji'sbirthday was; Ajji had always celebrated it on the MakaraSankranthi holiday. "Amma, willthere be a cake?"  asked Putti. "A big, spongy cake withpink icing and a rose on top?""Naah,"said Putta. "Old people don't have birthday cakes. And 200candles won't fit on any cake." "Muttajjiisn't 200 years old, silly," said Putti. "How old isMuttajji, Amma?"Amma smiled. "Whydon't you ask her when we get there?"
The moment theyreached the old green house in Mysore, the twins burst intoMuttajji's room. "Happy birthday, Muttajji! How old are youtoday?" Muttajji huggedthe twins. "How old am I? Who knows?  How does it matter?" "But itdoes!" cried Putta and Putti together.
Muttajji smiled."Well," she said, "I know that around five yearsbefore I was born, our Maharaja went to a grand party for IndianMaharajas and Maharanis in Delhi. A British king and queen had cometo visit, and our Maharaja got a gold medal." "Oooh! Aparty! There must have been lots of cake!" said Putti. "Whowas this king, Muttajji? If you know, we can find out which year hevisited. if we add five years to that, we will know when YOU wereborn!" Muttajjishrugged. "I've forgotten, Putta." Putta's face fell.
"Wait,"said Muttajji. "Let me see if I can remember something else.Aaaan! When I was about your age - nine or ten - my uncle from Bombayvisited us and told us about clean trains.""Cleantrains?" "Yes!"Muttajji was excited. "They had started running in Bombay thatyear. You never got dirty travelling in them.  No black dust on yourclothes and face, no grime, nothing!" The twins staredat her. Why would anyone get dirty travelling by train?
"Some yearslater," continued Muttajji, "I got married. The law wasthat a girl should be at least 15 before she was married, and myfather would never break the law, so I must have been 16 then.  Verysoon after my marriage, your Muttajja got a job in Bombay, and weleft Mysore."  "Didanything important happen the year you got married, Muttajji?" asked Putta. "Yes,"said Muttajji sadly. "Our Maharaja inaugurated our big dam, andthe beautiful gardens next to it, during the Dasara festival thatyear. But I missed it; I was in Bombay. ""A big dam?"Putta sat up. "Is it still there?"
Muttajji hootedwith laughter. "Of course! Rock-solid too. It was the dam thattamed the Kaveri. No more floods in the monsoon, and enough water forthe fields in the summer."Ajji put her headaround the door. "Are you talking about KRS, Amma?""Aaaan,KRS," Muttajji said, looking fondly at Ajji. "Your Ajji wasmy fifth child, the youngest, but always the smartest.  Do you know,twins, my children came like clockwork, one every two monsoons. Theday your Ajji decided to come out, your Muttajja could not be found.Later, he told us that he had gone to see Gandhiji give a speech atthe Gowalia Tank Maidan. He was so excited. 'Quit India!' he keptshouting the whole day, silly man, disturbing the baby.'
"QuitIndia!" Putti's eyes grew round with excitement. "Westudied it in history, Putta! The movement started in 1942! Thatmeans 1942 was the year that... ""...Ajji wasborn," pouted Putta. "Not Muttajji." "That's astart!" said Putti. "Which year were you born, Ajji?""I will be74 this year," said Ajji. "So I was born in?" Puttiquickly did the calculations. "1942!*" she said. Ajjinodded.*(2016 - 74 =1942)
"Now, Ajjiis Muttajji's fifth child and all her kids were two years apart!"said Putta. "So if Ajji was born in 1942...""...Muttajji'sfourth child was born in 1942 - 2 = 1940, the third in 1940 - 2 =1938, the second in 1938 - 2 = 1936, and the first in 1936 - 2 =1934." "So Muttajjiwas married in 1932!" cried Putti. "Notnecessarily," said Putta. "Muttajji didn't say her firstchild was born two years after her marriage. She only said a dam wasbuilt in Mysore the year she got married."
"Maybe thiswill help, twins," said Ajji, bringing in bowls of vermicellipayasa, Muttajji's favourite sweet dish. "KRS is theKrishnarajasagar Dam. The Brindavan Gardens are the gardens attachedto it. We went there last year to see the musical fountains,remember?"The twins nodded."Mmmm," said Putti. "Your payasa is the BEST, Ajji!"  "When wasKRS built, do you know, Ajji?" Ajji shook herhead. "I'm not sure. But you can go with Ajja to the centrallibrary after lunch and find out there."
In the library,Putti found a book on the history of Mysore. "Here it is!"she whispered.  "Two of Mysore's most visited tourist spots,the KRS Dam and the adjacent Brindavan Gardens, were opened to thepublic in 1932.'" The twins grinned - that meant Muttajjihad indeed married in 1932, 84* years ago!  *(2016 - 1932 = 84)
"Muttajjithinks she was 16 when she got married," said Putti, "butshe could have been 15 or 17 or 18.""She alsosaid she was about 9 or 10 when her Bombay uncle told her about the'clean' train," said Putta. "Ajja may know what thatmeans."Ajja was in thereading room. "Ajja," whispered Putti, "in the oldendays, did people get dirty travelling by train?" Ajja nodded."There were steam engines then, which ran on coal, notelectricity," he said. "Black coal dust used to fly out ofthe chimney and land on everyone and everything. Terrible!"  "That's it,Putti!" hissed Putta."Electric trains were the 'clean'trains!"
He pulled out abook on the Indian Railways. "It says here," he pointed,"that India's first electric train came to Bombay in 1925!" "And Muttajji says she was about 9 then," said Putta. "If she is right, then Muttajji was born in 1916*. ""But she could be wrong, you know," frowned Putti. "Only one way to make sure," said Putta. "We have to find out if that big party for kings and queens in Delhi, which Muttajji said happened five years before she was born, happened in 1911**."They ran back to Ajja.*(1925-9 =1916); **(1916 -5 = 1911)
"Ajja, wasthere a grand party for a foreign king who visited India around1911?" Ajja frowned."1911? Why is that date so familiar? Aaan yes. It was the yearthe Gateway of India was built in Bombay. And yes, it was built towelcome the British Emperor of India, George V! There must have beenseveral grand parties, not one." Ajja tapped his forehead,looking very pleased with himself. "Not bad for an old brain,eh?" "Not bad atall!" cried the twins. "Thanks, Ajja!" They knewexactly how old Muttajji was!
Five minuteslater, the twins were racing homewards. "Muttajji, "they panted, rushing straight to her room, "did the MysoreMaharaja get his gold medal from King George V?" "Aaaaaan!"Muttajji said happily. "That's it! George! What clever childrenyou are!" "That means,Muttajji, that you were born in 1916! You are exactly 100* years oldtoday!"*(2016 - 1916 = 100)
"That'sgreat detective work, twins!" smiled Amma. "I think you -and Muttajji - deserve a special treat. A big, spongy one, with pinkicing, and a rose on top." "Hurrayyyyyy!"cheered the twins.
The GrandMaharaja-Maharani Party (and other fun stuff from Indian history)Remember all theimportant historical events Muttajji talked about in the story? Theyall really happened! Here is a little more information about them.
The GrandMaharaja-Maharani Party (1911) - When the British Emperor GeorgeV and his wife Queen Mary visited India for the first time, theyhosted a grand party for over 400 Indian kings and queens. It wascalled the Delhi Durbar. To feed 200,000 guests, bakeries put out20000 loaves of bread a day, and over 1000 cattle and sheep wereslaughtered for every meal! Many Indian rulers received gold medalsfrom the Emperor, including the Maharaja of Mysore, KrishnarajaWodeyar IV.
The CleanTrains (1925)  - On Feb 3, 1925, India's first electric train leftBombay's Victoria Terminus for Kurla station. With that, India becamethe 3rd country in Asia and only the 24th in the world to introducerailway electrification.The Dam ThatTamed The Kaveri (1932) -  The Kaveri river runs through southernKarnataka and Tamil Nadu. The river was always a blessing, keepingMysore fertile, but, like every other river, it used to flood in themonsoons and run dry in the summer.  All that changed when a dam wasbuilt across the river and the Krishna Raja Sagara (KRS) reservoircreated.  The reservoir still provides most of the drinking water forBangalore city.
Gandhiji's BigSpeech (1942) -  The 'Quit India Speech' was a speech made byGandhiji on 8 August 1942, at the Gowalia Tank Maidan in Bombay. Gandhiji asked people to fight against British rule not by usingviolence, but by disobeying their laws. Five years later, on August15, 1947, the non-violent war got the results Gandhiji wanted - theBritish left, and India became independent. Today, the Gowalia TankMaidan is called the August Kranti Maidan in memory of that peacefulrevolution.
Dear…well, you know who you are. And it’s not like you’re ever goingto see this letter.Misstold me that I had to be your mentor and show you around because youare a new student. I didn’t know what a ‘mentor’ is, so Ilooked it up in the dictionary. Anyway, she didn’t tell me anythingabout that.Ali and Gaurav and Sumi and Rani, they kept asking me about it whenwe were going home from school. I told them that I didn’t know whatthey were talking about, but that’s not true. How can I not know? See,you made me lie to my friends.Yourssincerely,Me
Hiagain,Masays that it is not good to stare at people, but I can see thateveryone stares at you. They stare at me too because I have to hangaround with you and be your ‘mentor’. Why did you come to ourschool? Why couldn’t you continue going to whatever school you wentto earlier?Doyou know what happened yesterday? Gaurav, Ali and two of theirfriends from Class VII cornered me after school to ask aboutyou-know-what. They took my bag and wouldn’t give it back. Thenthey threw it into the thicket by the side of the road and I had toscramble down into the mountainside to get it. I tore my shirt and Mawas angry with me. Thisis all your fault. Me
Hello,I keep telling them that they can ask you whatever they want to know. What’s the point of asking me? How am I supposed to know why you have that thing or how it works?Tobe really honest, I can’t say I’m not curious myself or that Idon’t have the same questions the others are asking me. Yes, Inoticed it the first day when you came into the classroom. I saw howyou did everything with one hand and how your left hand never moved.At first I couldn’t tell what the problem was. Then, when I camecloser, I saw that something wasn’t quite right. It looked weird,like it was covered in plastic or something. Then I thought it was atoy hand. It took me some time to understand. Also,I saw what happened at lunch.Seeyou,Me
Hello,Myoldest sister, the one who’s studying engineering in Delhi, calledtoday. I told her, “There’s a girl in my class and she has a fakehand,” and she said that the term is “prosthetic hand”.Listen,I have some advice for you. You may be new and all, but if you wantpeople to stop staring at you and talking about you, you have to stopstanding in the corner all the time. Why don’t you play with us?Why don’t you come on the swing? Everyone loves the swing. It’sbeen two weeks, and you can jolly well come by yourself. I am notgoing to be your minder for ever.SometimesI don’t know what to say to you.Me
Hiagain,Afterthe lunch incident that day, I’ve been watching you. I’m justcurious. Is it weird to have one hand? Is it only your hand or isyour entire arm fake, sorry, prosthetic? Today,Sumi, Gaurav and I walked to school together. They were playing agame they made up called One-Hand Challenge. The rule is, you have todo things with one hand. Like, packing your bag or buttoning yourshirt.
Sumi couldn’t tie her shoelaces and she forgot about it andtripped and fell. She got a cut on her chin. Miss saw it and, eventhough she put some  antiseptic cream on it, she scolded Sumi forbeing careless. “You can’t run around in the mountains with yourshoelaces untied. What will happen if you fall while going home orsomething?” I think adults worry too much.Yourstruly,Me
Hi,Doyou know what a coincidence is? It’s like when you talk aboutsomething and the same thing happens sometime later in a completelyunrelated way. In my last letter, I was telling you about Sumi andthe shoelaces, and then, today, I saw you tying your shoelaces. Wow,that was awesome! I think you did it faster than I can do it with twohands. If you were my friend, I would challenge you to ashoelace-tying race. Or no, maybe I would ask you to teach me how todo it with one hand.Ihave to confess, I did try to tie my shoelace with one hand when Igot home. But it’s impossible. How do you do it? Maybe I’ll askyou tomorrow.Curious,Me
Hi,So,after what you said, I’ve tried to do a lot of things with only onehand, but it’s so difficult! I still don’t get how you do it,like having a bath, wearing your clothes, packing your bag. Sincethat day at lunch, I did realize that you have to do some thingsdifferently, but it’s not like you don’t do almost everything therest of us do.Listen,I’m sorry about what I said earlier... about playing with us. Iguess you were just feeling shy. And also about coming on the swing.I tried and it’s hard to get your balance if you don’t hold itwith two hands. But you’re great in the jungle gym, even if youdon’t hang from the bars, and you can run really fast, even fasterthan Ali, who won the first prize at Sports Day. Bye,Me
Hello!Thatmovie was really funny, no? I laughed so much that my stomach hurtand it was like I was crying. I always like it when they show moviesin school. It means no classes.Lasttime, before you came to our school, they showed this movie about atiger cub who got lost. It was quite scary, mostly because it was atrue story. Later someone found it and managed to get it back to itsfamily. True stories like that are called documentaries, did you knowthat? Tiger cubs are cute, no? Last year, there was a puppy near ourhouse. It was very cute too, but it grew up and then it wasn’t socute any more.Gotto go now!Me
Hello,hello!Didyou know? I was so surprised when I saw you on the bus. I had no ideamy father worked in the same place as yours! But I’m so happy youcame for the office picnic, because last year when they took us,there were no other children my age and I got really bored.Okay,I’m really tired, so I’m going now. See you in school tomorrow.Me
Hi,Ithink I should warn you, Principal Sir becomes slightly insanewhenever Annual Day comes along. He might yell at you — he yells ateveryone — so don’t take it personally. My ma says that he’sunder a lot of pressure because our Annual Day performance reflectson him. I’m not sure what that means, but he does look stressedout. Did you see his hair? It was like he touched a loose wire andgot an electric shock! Though I think it was very mean of Rani to puta frog in his chair.Okay,I’m going now before he catches me writing this letter!Me
Hey,Yournew hand is so cool! No offence, but the old one was a bit boring. Itwas just… there. The new one is like magic, and you can move thefingers and grip with it! I hope you didn’t mind that I asked toshake hands. I just said it before I could think. Maybe tomorrow wecan do some experiments to find out if you can lift stuff with it.Oh!I just realized, the last couple of letters I wrote to you, I didn’tmention your prosthetic hand at all. It’s like I forgot all aboutit and wanted to tell you so many other things. The funny thing is,I’m not that curious about your hand any more. I don’t know why. Yourfriend,Me
THE FRIEND-O-METER QUIZHowgood are you at helping people fit in? Take our Friend-o-Meter quizto find out!1. Yourteacher asks you to show the new student in school around. What doyou feel?a. Fantastic!A new friend!b. Whycan’t they figure things out themselves?c. Uhoh…2. Agirl in your class walks with a limp. The others laugh at her. Whatdo you do?a. Nothing– it’s none of your business.b. Tellher to ignore them – they’re mean.c. Askyour classmates to imagine if they were different.
3. Yournew classmate is having trouble with his lessons. What can you do?a. Tellthe brainiest student in class to lend him her notes.b. Tellthe teacher – it’s her job to help him.c. Askhim if you could help him with his work.4. Thenew girl in class is rather shy. She doesn’t play with anyone. Whatcan you do?a. Lether be – she’ll join in when she’s ready.b. Callher over and make her join in the games.c. Goand sit next to her – maybe she’ll start a conversation.
Getyour score:Q1.a - 1; b - 2 ; c - 3Q2. a - 2; b - 1 ; c - 3Q3. a - 3; b - 2; c - 1Q4.a - 2; b - 1;  c - 3 Nowadd it up. If you've scored...
4-6 points:You are a born friend, always ready to lend a hand. You don’t wait for people to ask for help – you’re already there, waiting to give it to them.7-9 points:You are an independent person and feel that people should be too. But that doesn’t mean you don’t care – you just don’t want to force anyone.10-12 points:You might be a little shy, but you are kind-hearted too. You’ll do whatever you can indirectly to help others and make them feel at ease.
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
This is Khalai. She is seven years old. Her name means 'the good one.'
Khalai wakes up and talks to the orange tree. "Please orange tree, grow big and give us lots of ripe oranges."
Khalai walks to school. On the way,  she talks to the grass. "Please grass,  grow greener and don't dry up."
Khalai sees flowers. "Please flowers,  keep blooming so I can put you in my hair."
Khalai talks to the tree at her school. "Please tree,  put out big branches so we can read under your shade."
Khalai talks to the hedge round her school. "Please,  grow strong and protect us from bad people."
When Khalai returns home,  she visits the orange tree. "Are your oranges ripe yet?" Khalai asks the tree.
"The oranges are still green," sighs Khalai.  "I will see you tomorrow orange tree," says Khalai. "Perhaps then,  you will have a ripe orange for me!"
Why is the sky blue?
It is not always blue. Is it?
Why are leaves green?
They are not always green. Are they?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow. Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is blood red?
There is iron in the blood. That makes it red.
Why is salt white?
I don't know!
My friend Kiki and I walk home from school.
One day, a man followed us.
His teeth were brown. He had pimples on the face.
When we looked at him, he shouted at us angrily.
Kiki managed to run away.
They threw me into a van.
They put me in a dark room. My hands were tied.
A man said, "Eat this food. The journey is long."
As I ate, the man smoked a cigarette.
Suddenly, the other men came in pulling my friend Kiki.
We heard the men arguing and shouting in the next room.
Kiki said, "We must escape. Our parents cannot pay them."
We pulled the timber from the window until we saw light.
Kiki climbed out and ran to get help.
The men rushed into the room. The leader was angry.
They went back to the other room and continued arguing.
I heard a voice saying, "Don't be afraid. Police are here."
They were shouting and making noise. I heard some gunshots.
A policewoman said, "Everything is over. You are safe now."
After that day, Kiki and I were more careful.
Elephant is thirsty.He is happy to have the whole pond to himself.
Two giraffes are thirsty too.Will they fight over the water?
Three buffaloes want to drink water.Will they let the four birds also drink some water?
Five antelopes need some water.Can five antelopes and six warthogs drink water from the same source?
Will the seven zebras be let to drink water as well?Let's wait and see.
Frogs and fish swim in the same water.Humans can swim alongside frogs and fish.They can all drink water from the same source.
The lion roars when he arrives at the river.Can the lion, the elephant, buffaloes, the giraffe, warthogs, antelopes and birds all drink water together?
The elephant and the lion can drink water from the same river.Where does your water come from?Who do you share the water with?
My name is Simo.
Meet my new friends.
Zizo,  Lele,  Sisa and Ayanda.
Zizo loves football.
Lele loves to swim.
Sisa loves to play hide and seek.
Ayanda loves reading.
I enjoy everything my friends love.
I will play football with Zizo.
Sometimes I swim with Lele.
Or even play hide and seek with Sisa.
Come on,  make new friends and have fun.
Play football together.
Swim together.
Play hide and seek together.
Or even read together.
In the swamp on the far side of the Far Forest, lived Sniffles, the Crocodile. Sniffles was always crying big crocodile tears or going sniff... sniff... Even his mom was quite tired of him and would say, “Stop snivelling and crying, start behaving like a crocodile. Go hunt for your food.”
But Sniffles would burst into tears at the thought of eating another animal. So mom and dad had to feed Sniffles every day.
Sniffles did not want to be a crocodile. 'I am so ugly,' he thought, bursting into tears. He did not even want to live like crocodiles do. His best friend was Punch, a golden yellow butterfly. And Punch wanted to be big and strong. So Punch always had her feeler curled into a fist saying, “Look out! I will punch you in the mouth.”
They made a very funny pair. Sniffles swimming with Punch perched on his head. The other crocodiles would laugh and make fun of them. That did not bother Sniffles. He continued crying, sniffling and being friends with Punch.
One sunny afternoon, Punch settled herself near Sniffles’ ear and told him, “I have seen two men come this way with guns, they want to kill crocodiles for their skins.”“Don’t these men have skins of their own?” asked a puzzled Sniffles.“I don’t know Sniffles,” replied Punch. “Tell the other crocodiles and hide.”
“But Punch, they might shoot you. Oh! What will I do,” cried Sniffles sobbing loudly.“People catch butterflies with nets and pin them on a board, my grandaunt told me,” said Punch and flew away.
The other crocodiles heard Sniffles crying and shouting, “Men coming to kill us. Hide ... Hurry ... Hide.” At first the crocodiles did not believe Sniffles, but then they heard the men’s footsteps. The crocodiles went deep into the river and left some rotten logs floating on the water. The men shot at the logs which looked like crocodiles from afar. The men could not see any crocodiles, only hundreds of butterflies that flew into their faces and hair.
Shaking their heads and trying to brush off the butterflies they said, “There are no crocodiles here, we will bring nets and catch the butterflies.” And off they went. All the crocodiles got together and said, “Thank you, Punch.”“Thank you, butterflies.”
The next day Sniffles saw men with nets. He remembered Punch telling him about nets. “Punch, the nets! Come here quick! The men with the nets have come.” All the crocodiles came on the river bank. The butterflies settled on the backs and heads of the crocodiles.
A few of the crocodiles made a circle around the men as they came close. The crocodiles snapped their jaws. Sniffles was in front, gnashing his teeth and whipping his tail around most menacingly.
The men were so frightened that they took to their heels and ran right out of the swamp. The other crocodiles were very proud of Sniffles, as he had acted like a real crocodile. Now Sniffles was also proud to be one.
All the butterflies flew around the crocodiles, fluttering their wings.“Thank you, Sniffles, Thank you, crocodiles.”“It is all right,” said Sniffles shyly. “That is what friends are for, to take care of each other.”
“We have milk, eggs,bread  and vegetables in the fridge,” says Ma.“I’ll cook dinner!” says Pa.“Pa, can you make fried rice?” asks Tara. “Fried rice,” Madhav echoes.
As soon as Tara, Madhav, Ma and Pa enter the house, they know that something is wrong. Very wrong."Chee! What’s that smell?” cries Tara.“A MONSTER!” yells Madhav.
It is hot, dark and stinky. The whole house smells!Where is the smell coming from?
Ma opens the fridge. Everyone covers their noses and mouths.“Hmm, it’s warm inside and the light is off,” says Ma, sticking her arm into the fridge. “What happened?” asks Tara. "The fridge stopped working some time ago," Pa explains. "Without the cold air, everything spoiled,” says Ma, glumly.“Has the milk gone bad?” asks Tara.“Yes, can you smell how sour it is?” asks Ma.“Milk needs to be kept cold to stay fresh,” says Pa.
“Has the bread gone bad?” asks Tara.“Yes, do you see that green stuff? That’s mould,” says Pa, “It grows on the bread.”“Fuzzy,” says Madhav, curiously.“Don’t touch it,” says Pa. “You’ll fall sick if you eat it.”
“Have the vegetables gone bad too?” asks Tara, sadly.“Yes, they’re rotten,” says Ma. “We can’t eat them.”
Invisible MonstersTara and Madhav thought there was an invisible monster in their house. While there was no monster to be found, they were right about there being something invisible!When food goes ‘bad’—meaning it cannot be eaten by human beings—it’s because something invisible has begun to eat the food. These invisible beings are called microbes.Microbes aren’t totally invisible: they’re just very, very, very tiny (tinier than the tiniest insect you’ve ever seen). You need a machine called a microscope to be able to see them. They look something like this.
It was a little girl who first saw the mysterious shape in the distance.
As the shape moved closer, the girl saw that it was a heavily pregnant woman.
Shy but brave, the little girl moved nearer to the woman. "We must keep her with us," the little girl's people decided. "We'll keep her and her child safe."
The child was soon on its way. Everyone wanted to help. "Push!" "Bring blankets!" "Water!" "Puuuuussssshhh!"
But when they saw the baby, everyone jumped back in shock. "A donkey!"
Everyone began to argue. "We said we would keep mother and child safe, and that's what we'll do," said some. "But they will bring us bad luck!" said others.
And so the woman found herself alone again. She wondered what to do with this awkward child. She wondered what to do with herself.
But finally she had to accept that he was her child and she was his mother. Now, if the child had stayed that same, small size, everything might have been different.
But the donkey child grew and grew until he could no longer fit on his mother's back. And no matter how hard he tried, he could not behave like a human being. His mother was often tired and frustrated. Sometimes she made him do work meant for animals.
Confusion and anger built up inside Donkey. He couldn't do this and he couldn't do that. He couldn't be like this and he couldn't be like that. He became so angry that, one day, he kicked his mother to the ground.
Donkey was filled with shame. He ran away as far and as fast as he could.
By the time he stopped running, it was night, and Donkey was lost. "Hee haw?" he whispered to the darkness. "Hee Haw?" it echoed back. He was all alone. Curling himself into a tight ball, he fell into a deep and troubled sleep.
Donkey woke up to find a strange old man staring down at him. He looked into the old man's eyes and started to feel a twinkle of hope.
Donkey went to stay with the old man, who taught him many different ways to survive. Donkey listened and learned, and so did the old man. They helped each other, and they laughed together.
One morning, the old man asked Donkey to carry him to the top of a mountain.
High up amongst the clouds they fell asleep. Donkey dreamed that his mother was sick and calling to him.
When Donkey woke up, the clouds had disappeared along with his friend, the old man.
Donkey finally knew what to do.
Donkey found his mother, alone and mourning her lost child. They stared at each other for a long time. And then hugged each other very hard.
The donkey child and his mother have grown together and found many ways of living together. Slowly,  all around them, other families have started to settle.
Once, a rabbit thought to itself, "I have been eating raw carrots so far...
"Let me cook and eat it. "
"How do I cook?"
"Let me ask for help in this house"
But, there was a dog that started barking . He also chased the rabbit.
"Oh dear! What do I do now?" thought the rabbit.
He kept the carrots in the sun. The carrots didn't  cook.
He cooked the carrots in the fire. The carrots became too bitter!
"How do I cook and eat this? " Thought the rabbit furiously to himself.
He found a tortoise shell.
He gathered twigs.
He also found stones!
The rabbit lit the stove.
He also invited his friends to eat.
Everybody enjoyed eating the finely cooked carrots!
Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boy wearing a beautiful shirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like the one that boy has," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt for Hamisi!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
There was a big dark jungle. There were lots of trees and a narrow path. Many animals and birds lived here.
One day, all the animals came together.“Did you hear?” asked Tota, the parrot.“Yes,” said Hirni, the deer.“What?” asked Darpok, the rabbit.“We have a school in the jungle,”answered Zhoola, the monkey.Mota, the elephant wondered, “Hmph?”Lamboo, the giraffe said, “Oh, good!”Dheema, the snail squealed, “Hurry, let’s go!”
Tota, the parrot flew ahead. Zhoola, the monkey jumped from tree to tree. Poorakha, the python slithered fast. “Here!” shouted Tota. “Can you read?”“It is upside down, I think,” said Zhoolahanging by the branch. Poorakha concluded, “Hisssss. No one can read.”
Soon, all the other friends joined them.Lamboo looked over the tree. “No one here,” he said.Zhoola repeated, “No one here.”Tota proposed, “Look carefully!”Pilloo, the little bear declared, “I found a room!”
“I found a swing,” announced Dheema.“What are these blocks?” Darpok wanted to know.“What is this?” was Zhoola’s question.Poorakha explained, “I believe, this is a pencil.”
Mota and Lamboo found a classroom.They called the others, “Look, what is this?”Everyone came with school bags. They began shouting, “Teacher! Teacher!Where is our teacher?” No one knew.
Then they heard a roar. They heard a loud roar. They heard a louder roar. Poorakha was worried. Dheema was scared. Tota hid behind the board. Lamboo and Zhoola were puzzled. Who is this? “Hup!” said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke.
Who is this? “Hup!” said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke. They all looked at the teacher. Up and down carefully. Then they looked at one another. The teacher turned to write on the black board.
“Jump,” said Zhoola.“Fly!” said Tota. Thump, thump, thump ran Mota.“Run, run, run fast,” screamed Dheema.“Bhagoooo,” they all shouted together.When the teacher turned... there was no one in the class.
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night.Because they weremade of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! Hemelted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose,he flew away, singing in the morning light.
“What’s for supper?” asked Sam.“It’s a surprise”, said Mama, putting a big pot on the stove.
She added a jug of water. Sam wasworried. “Are wehaving water for supper?” he wailed.“It’s a surprise. Wait and see.” replied Mama.
“Can I help?” asked Sam. “I could stir.”
“You are still a bit short,” said Mama.“The pot might fallover. But you can help me by fetchingthings.”
“Can you bring me an onion, please.”“This doesn’t smell very nice.”
“They will taste nice once they are cooked.”
“Now I need some tomatoes. No, that is an apple.The tomatoes are also round and red, but you will find them in the fridge.”
“Can you bring me potatoes.They are round and brown.”
“Is supper ready yet?”
“If you are hungry you can eat the apple while you wait.”
“What about these?” “No, we won’t needbiscuits. We can savethose for aftersupper.”
“What’s in the pot?”
“It’s a surprise. Wait and see.”
“What about this?”“That is a watermelon. It will be too big for the pot.”
“See if you can find some spinach. It is also green.”
“Please get some bread. No, it won’t go into the pot but on the table.”
Mama carried the pot to the table and started to dish up.“What’s in the pot?” asked Sam.
“Soup!” My favourite!
Long ago, animals had no legs.
Maguru had given legs only to people.
Maguru decided to give legs to every animal.
The animals wanted legs to walk and run.
It was hard for them to crawl.
When the day came, different animals crawled to Maguru's house.
Maguru gave legs to animals and birds.
Some animals danced, while others fell down.
They said, "We will never crawl again."
Millipede was the last animal on the line.
Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.
Millipede said happily, “I will move faster than others.”
After Millipede, Snake came begging, “Please give me some legs.”
Snake said to Maguru, "I over-slept."
Maguru did not find any legs for Snake.
From that day, Snake still waits to get legs.
Sonu, Monu and Rina set out to play.They saw a kitten.
She was looking at a big rat."Oh look!" shouted Sonu.
Rina saw a tiny ant going towards the big rat.
Suddenly, a very big shadow fell upon them all.
A very big eagle came down to the wall.A tiny ant, a small kitten,a big rat and a very big eagle in the same long street!
What would the three clever children do now?
They clapped their little hands!The eagle spread its big wings and flew away.
Rina made the ant climb onto a leaf. She left the leaf on the wall.The ant saw a grain of sugar. She picked it up and ran home.
The big rat picked up a half-eaten pakoda and went back into the drain.The small kitten said 'miaaww' and started licking her paw.
Monu got her some milk in a cup.The three kids played with her.
The very big eagle sitting on the tree blinked and flew far away.
It was a bright moonlit night. All the animals in Mangu's farm were sleeping. Except Tinku!
“I am not sleepy, Ma,” murmured Tinku. But Ma did not hear him. She was fast asleep. He turned left, and he turned right. He lay on his tummy, and rolled on his back. But he could not sleep!
So he set off into the night to see what he could find. Up in the sky, Tinku saw the moon, white and round, smiling down at him. He felt very happy.‘Night is beautiful,’ thought Tinku.
Far away on the top of a tree, there were some tiny lights. One spot of light flew down! “I’m a firefly,” said the spot of light. “I glow in the dark!”“Will you be my friend?” asked Tinku.“Yes, I will!” said the firefly.
Something flew by and hung upside down on a tree. “What is your name, bird?” asked Tinku.“I am not a bird, I am a bat. I can see during the night!” said the bat.“Will you be my friend?” asked Tinku.“Yes, I will!” said the bat.
A few leaves moved in the bushes. Someone was hiding! “Who are you?” asked Tinku.“I am a fox,” said the fox. “I go strolling out at night.”“Will you be my friend?” asked Tinku.“Yes, I will!” said the fox.
Two shiny eyes looked at him from a tree. “Who are you?” asked Tinku.“I’m an owl,” said the owl. “I hunt for food during the night.”“Will you be my friend?” asked Tinku.“Yes, I will!” said the owl.
“CHIRRRRRP! CHIRRRRRP!”“Who is here?” Tinku asked.“I’m a cricket,” said the cricket. “I chirp when it is dark.”“Will you be my friend?” asked Tinku.“Yes, I will!” said the cricket.
Tinku and his friends jumped and tossed and rolled until Tinku yawned. “I am sleepy. I have to go home now,” said Tinku. He was happy that he had many new friends. Snuggling close to Ma, he said, “Night is not a lonely place, Ma. Night is full of wonderful beings.”“Yes!” replied Ma. “Your new friends are nocturnal, just like wild dogs.”
“Nocturnal animals eat, play and work at night. They rest during the day. You must sleep now. Sleep will give you energy to play with your day-time friends tomorrow. Good night, little one!” she said, hugging him tight.
The bright round moon shone all night long, spreading her calm light all around. And Tinku slept all through the night!
One day I met Agnes.Agnes is a teacher.
Agnes uses crutches to walk.
When I went to town, I saw Metobo. He is a radio DJ.
Metobo has albinism.He has problems with his eyes and with his skin.
My neighbour isMoraa. She is a farmer.
Moraa has a problem with hearing. She speaks using Sign language.
Osero is the best soccer player in my school. I like to watch him play.
Osero lost his hands in an accident. However, he scores many goals for his team!
There lived a girl called Kalabushe. She talked a lot.
One day, Kalabushe’s aunt fell ill.
That evening, Kalabushe took food to her sick aunt.
Kalabushe met a hyena who had changed into a person.
Kalabushe told him, “I am carrying meat, eggs and milk.”
The hyena licked his lips as he thought about meat.
The hyena ran ahead of Kalabushe to her aunt’s house.
He swallowed Kalabushe’s aunt. He covered himself with her blanket.
Kalabushe arrived and called out, “Aunt, where are you?”
Kalabushe saw someone covered with a big blanket.
Kalabushe asked, “Aunt, why are your ears so big today?”
“Aunt, why are your eyes so big?”
“Aunt, why is your mouth big?” The hyena swallowed her!
Kalabushe kept asking questions while inside the hyena’s stomach.
He became tired of Kalabushe’s questions. He spat her out.
Kalabushe and her aunt were rescued by the villagers.
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night. Because they were made of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! He melted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose, he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Why is the baby crying?
I think she is hungry.
Why is the boy sad?
I think he is missing his father.
Why is the girl happy?
She has a new dress.
Why is the old man laughing?
He read a good joke.
Why is the lady smiling?
Her children are reading quietly.
What is this lady feeling?I think she is feeling shy.
Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn,  and no tail.
It is fat,  with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze,  this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow,  what would you do?
One day, Mr Sloth came to visit. He said: I’m sleepy! I need a good branch for a bed! Yawn! Yawn! Yawn!
I’m quite good at climbing. I know how to swing.But sleeping’s my favourite, favourite thing!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth! A giraffe’s eating there!He might think you’re lunch and start nibbling your hair!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth! There’s a beehive right there! You’ll never get sleep with those bees everywhere!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth, that’s a snake over there! Not a branch! Poor old snake. You gave him quite a scare. Sssssss! sssSSSs! SSss! Ssss!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth!There’s a bird squawking there! You’ll never get sleep with that noise in the air!Haw-haw! Haw-Haw! Haw-haw!
Try climb one more branch, Mr Sloth! they all said. And that branch was just the right one for his bed.
The bird and the snake, the giraffe and each bee. Were happy to have Mr Sloth in their tree.
Where is my cat?
Is it under the bed?
Is it on top of the cupboard?
Is it behind the couch?
Is it next to the bin?
Is it inside the basket?
Is it outside the house?
Here it is!
Tingi lived with his grandmother.
He used to look after the cows with her.
One day the soldiers came.
They took the cows away.
Tingi and his grandmother ran away.
They hid in the bush until night.
Then the soldiers came back.
Grandmother hid Tingi under the leaves.
One of the soldiers put his foot right on him,  but he kept quiet.
When it was safe,  Tingi and his grandmother came out.
They crept home very quietly.
Andile o belegetswe kwa Gqeberha, Kwa Kapa Bokone.O ne a nna le mmaagwe le rraagwe. Ba nna kwa Brighton.Gaufi, go le motsana o bidiwa Tyeni.Ntatemogolo wa gagwe o ne a nna koo.
Andile o ne a rata go etela Ntatemogolo. Ana le lesaka la dikgomo.O ne a botsa Andile gore, “Dikgomo tse tshegadi le tse namagadi di kae? Le gore ke tse kae mo losakeng?”Lwantlha, Andile o ithutile go bala go fitlha go lesome, a dirisa menwana. A atolosa gi ya go masomeamabedi, ka maoto a gagwe! O ne a itse go bala ka botlhano.
Mo mosong, mokoko o ne o lela. E le ura ya botlhano fa ba tsoga. Ba ipaakanyetsa go gama dikgomo.Morago, ba ya kwa thabeng e e gaufi go fudisa dikgomo.Ba dirisa letsatsi go buisa nako.
Mo motshegareng, Ntataagwe mogolo a mmitsa. Gore a tle go ja. E ne e le ura ya bolesomepedi.O ne a itse fa e le nako ya go ya gae.E le fa letsatsi le dikelaO ne a bala dikgomo. Go netefatsa fa di buile tsotlhe.
Fa Andile a simolola go ya sekolong. Rraagwe a mo rekela tshupanako.A dirisa tshupanako go bala ka bobedi, boraro le bone.E le ka fa tshupanako e na le dipalo go simolola ka nngwe go fitlha ka lesomepedi.A itse gore lenaka le legolo, mo lesomepedi ke ura, mme, fa le supile thataro ke masome-a-mararo morago ga ura.
Andile o ne a bala dipalo ka tlhaloganyo. A balela go ya kwa pele le kwa morago a dirisa tlhogo.O ne a kgona go bala matsatsi a beke le dikgwedi tsa ngwaga, ka tatelano.Ka nako e dikgomo di belegang. O ne a atisa dipalo a bala dinamane.
Ka Labotlhano a paka diaparo a ya kwa go ntatemogolo. A nna Lamatlhatso le Latshipi.Ka Mosupologo a boela gae, go ya sekolong.Fa dikolo di tswalelwa a ya go eta, a itumelela go disa dikgomo.
Fa Andile a simolola sekolo. Ba ne ba dirisa majwe le dikotana go bala.O ne a dirisa menwana go kwala fa fatshe. A ikatisa go tlhakanya dipalo mo mmung.Phaposiborutelo e le fa tlase ga setlhare. Fa pula e na, ba sa ye sekolong.
Fa mosimane wa kwa Brighton a gola, a ya kwa Yunibesithing go ithutela dipalo. O ithutile dingwaga di le dintsi.Gompieni, Andile Mji o dira kwa lefapheng la dipalo le mananepalo.O santse a kgona go buisa nako jaaka bogologolo, a dirisa letsatsi.
Gompieni, Andile ke moitseanape Mji. O dirisa menwana ya gagwe go tlanya mo khomphutareng.O dirisa dipalo le kerafo go kwala dikgang. Dipalo o di dirisa go fitlhelela ditharabololo.O dirisa mananepalo go araba dipotso jaaka, ‘Ke bana ba dinyaga di le kae kwa sekolong?’
Moitseanape Mji o dira ka khomphutara le dipalo.A re, “Khomphutara e botlhokwa, fela nako nngwe e a latlhega! Tlhaloganyo ya me e nna mo tlhogong, go fitlha kwa bokhutlong.Mo dipalong, ga go fetoge sepe. Dipalo di nnela ruri.”
Moitseanape Mji o go tshwaretse molaetsa:“Go itse dipalo, o tshwanetse go ikatisa go dira ka dinomoro.Dipalo ke ‘go dira’ Dipalo ke mokgwa.O tshwanetse go ithuta go akanya ka dinomoro. Ka fao, o tla nna mogaka!”
First, I will build a bridge. After that, I will build a very tall tower. And then, I will build the longest roadin the world. It will start at my roomand go right up to the moon!When I build these structures,I will be a civil engineer.
I will build engines too.Some engines will be in rocketsand some will bein planes.The plane will take us from country to country and the rocket will fly us all the way to Mars.My Anaideo* will come with me on all my trips!When I build flying engines,I will be an aerospace engineer.*Anaideo means grandmotherin Assamese.
But I won’t stop at that.I will produce electricity from small particles.One tiny particle will light up our whole village.Anaideo will be so happy that she will throw a big feast!When I make power like that, I will be a nuclear engineer.
I will build a machine to clean the sea.And another to clean the air.The animals will be healthyand people will breathe easy.I will save the earthwith my machines!When I make machinesto clean the planet,I will be an environmental engineer.
I will build a new ear for Pempem(she lost it in a fight... grrrr).Then I will build a new set of teeth for Anaideo.Finally, I will build wings for me!When I build artificial body parts,I will be a biomedical engineer.And I will soar over theworldlooking for more things to build.
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. “Ants don’t read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need.”
Little Ant would read all day, he’d read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down.
The ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. “A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read.”
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said “Hey, there’s one!”
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger, carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand “Now I think I understand.” “The way you love to read a book … Makes me want to take alook.”
Let me tell you my story. I start as a small spark.
I spread when the wind carries me.
We are good friends,  you and I.
I cook your food.
I light your night.
I have many tricks.
I am part of your family.
But be careful when you invite me to your home. I don't like to be left alone.
Come back, cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back, cat! That’s way too high.
Come back, cat! Don’t go outside.
Come back, cat! That’s not yours.
Come back, cat. What have you got?
Come back, cat.  That’s not your friend!
Hello, cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It’s nap time now.
Cat?
Long, long ago there was a king called Kayanja. He lived in a palace with his queen and their daughter, Princess Apenyo. Princess Apenyo was such a beautiful young woman that every man wanted to marry her. But king Kayanja demanded a very high bride price for the princess.
Near king Kayanja's palace lived a chief called Aludah the Great. He was called "the Great" because everybody in the neighbourhood obeyed him, and he was very violent to anyone who disobeyed him! Chief Aludah's wife had recently died of malaria, and he wanted another wife.
So the fat old chief went to king Kayanja to offer bride wealth for the young princess. While the two men were discussing the price, the maid Kakembo overheard their conversation. Maid Kakembo was very close to princess Apenyo.
Chief Aludah agreed to give half of his wealth to king Kayanja, including a needle, which was also part of the bride price. Preparations were made in secret for the wedding between chief Aludah and princess Apenyo. The king knew that his daughter would not be happy with this decision.
One week before the royal wedding day, maid Kakembo approached Apenyo. "My dear Princess,  your father has organised your wedding with chief Aludah, and it will take place in one week."
Princess Apenyo was shocked and at first didn't know what to do. Then she thought, "I will never marry chief Aludah, that fat old man. Never! I must hurry to Trevor and see what he can do before it's too late." Trevor was princess Apenyo's boyfriend.
That night Apenyo crept out of the palace. If her father discovered where she was going he would be very angry. She ran through the thick, dark forest over rocks and shrubs. When finally she arrived at Trevor's house she was tired and thirsty.
"My love, why have you run all this long distance alone and at such a time of night?" asked Trevor. He fetched water for her and allowed her to rest. Trevor could not settle down while he waited for Apenyo to talk.
"My dear princess, what is the problem?" asked Trevor. Apenyo breathed heavily and said sadly, "My father wants to marry me off to chief Aludah the Great. But I can't marry that horrible man. Trevor, I want to marry you even if you are poor. I am ready to suffer. I love you."
"But princess, I have nothing to pay as your bride price, you know I'm a poor boy," cried Trevor. Apenyo replied, "I know, but it's only you I can get married to." She thought for a while and said, "Let's go to Kategga the boatman and ask him to take us across the river. That way we can escape and my father will never find us."
Back at the palace, king Kayanja had discovered princess Apenyo's disappearance. He ordered his subjects to search for her everywhere. The king's guards, soldiers, and everyone else searched, but they couldn't find the princess. They went back to the king and told him that Apenyo was nowhere to be seen. "Then go back and search again," King Kayanja ordered. He was very annoyed.
As Princess Apenyo and Trevor hurried to the riverbank, dark clouds began gathering in the sky. A heavy storm was coming.
Kategga the boatman was mooring his boat when the young couple approached him. Trevor asked Kategga to row them across the river. Kategga refused to accept, explaining that a heavy storm was fast approaching, and it would be too dangerous.
Trevor insisted and explained to Kategga why they must cross. He then put his hand deep in his pocket and took out a cowrie shell to give to Kategga. When Kategga heard their story and saw the beautiful shell, he felt sorry for them. He agreed to row them across the river in spite of the weather.
When King Kayanja and chief Aludah reached the bank, they saw the three people in the boat. They realised that the young lovers had escaped. Heavy winds rocked the boat and Kategga could no longer control it. King Kayanja shouted, "Apenyo, please come back! I forgive you. I will never punish you or Trevor."
But, it was too late. The boat tipped over and the three people were thrown into the wild water. They all drowned. After that day, everyone in king Kayanja's kingdom could marry anyone they wanted, rich or poor.
bunty loves to play with butterflies
and with birds too
she loves to play with paper boats
she also loves to make sand castles
when bunty returned home her mom asks her to clean herself but she refuses
i hate soaps she screams
one night bunty had a dream germs and bacteria are attacking on her palace
bunty run for her life she screams help help
suddenly soap king bubbly appears bunty don't be afraid go attack the germs said king bubbly to his army of bubbles
bubbles attacked the germs and make them go away
now bunty loves to rub and scrub herselfs
His hoe was too short.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was too short.
His bicycle was too short.
This man was too tall!
He made a very long hoe handle.
He made very high door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for many years.
For the children in every country of Africa
My name is Duma and I am ten years old.I live with my sister Zinhle who is thirteen years old.We live with Mama, Baba, our little brother Wandile, and our dog Bhubesi.
Since this coronavirus came, our lives have changed. It is such a small virus but it can make us very sick. Any person can get very sick from this coronavirus.
I am sad because I cannot play with my friends. Wandile is sad that he cannot hug his friends. Zinhle is also sad that she can't share her lip gloss with her friends.
Mama is a cleaner at the hospital in town. Baba sells fruits and vegetables in town.Every morning they leave for work and Zinhle looks after us.
Our neighbour, Gogo, is very old and has a heart problem. No one is allowed near her these days. The coronavirus is very dangerous for older people.We don't want to make her sick.
After work, Mama goes to check on Gogo and brings her fresh fruits. Mama leaves the fruits at the door because she can't go into the house.
Every morning, Zinhle goes to collect water from the nearby taps. Some people are wearing masks, some are not. Zinhle made a mask using her doek. She washes her hands at home. Mama puts hand sanitizer on our hands.
Every night, Mama reminds us: "Wear a fresh mask every day. Wash your hands with soap for 20 seconds when you arrive anywhere. Cover your mouth and nose if you cough or sneeze.""Yes, Mama!" we say.
1. Wash your hands with water.2. Use soap to wash your hands.3. Wash for 20 seconds or slowly count from 1 to 20.4. Rinse your hands with water.5. Dry your hands with clean towel or tissue.6. Now your hands are clean!
Once upon a time Jackal was walking around the bush. He was very hungry. He saw Crow flying above the trees with a big piece of cheese in his mouth.
"Hmmm that cheese looks delicious! I must find a way to get it," thought Jackal. "Oh, I have a plan!" said Jackal to himself while wiping his mouth quickly. He did not want Crow to notice that he was hungry.
Crow had been flying the whole morning. He was tired. He decided to sit on a branch of a tree. Jackal sat down under the tree where Crow was sitting.
Jackal called with a huge smile, "Hello Crow! You're looking very good today. Your feathers look glossy and healthy. You must be taking very good care of yourself."
Crow was very flattered to hear this. Crow always thought he was the strongest and most beautiful of all the other birds.
"I hear you also have the most beautiful singing voice of all the other birds. Won't you sing a song for me this morning?"
Crow was so flattered that he stretched his wings and prepared to sing for the jackal. He pushed his chest out and let out a loud pitched sound.
As Crow started singing the cheese fell to the ground, right in front of Jackal. Crow stopped and looked down. Jackal grabbed the piece of cheese and ran into the bush. Crow was left angry and hungry.
Zama is getting ready for school.
Dad is cooking porridge for breakfast. He mixes it with milk.
"Mummy has got the sweetest breast milk!" says Zama.
Milk has got fats, vitamins, calcium which gives Zama alot of energy for school.
The milk is ready.
Dad pours the milk,  with love.
"Dad,  I think this porridge needs more sugar and milk," says Zama.
"Mummy's milk tastes much better than Dad's milk," says Zama.
"Dad,  please in this milk asks Zama."
Dad adds sugar to Zama's milk.
"Wu! Dad! You added water in my milk!"
"Dad,  when will Mom be home?" asks Zama.
Today is Saturday. It is very hot.
Alice,  Arthur and Anabel want to swim in the river.
"Lets remove our clothes and go to swim",  says Anabel.
"We all jump and swim",  says Arthur.
"Oh come on! Let's swim, Swimming is fun!" says Alice.
The sun is going down,  we feel chilly. Where are our clothes?
Lets look for them. Under trees. In the bushes. Or everywhere.
Oh! A cow! What's that in her mouth? "My shirt",  cries Arthur.
Oh my God! Another one, "That's my skirt!"  shouted Alice.
My children, "What has happened to you?"
Nosisi, it’s time to stop playing. Please come inside?
No!
Nosisi, we need to go to the shops. No!
Look at these beautiful butterflies.                                                                   No!
Come help Mama make some rice. No!
Let’s feed Shakes.                                                                          No!
Nosisi it’s bath time... No!
No  No            No
No!Nonononono...
How about an ice cream? No!
Oh. Not no...
Yes! Yummy. Yummy.
Yay! Yay! Yay!
Nosisi, will you tidy your room?
Hmmmm. Well...okay.
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. "Why do you have a long neck?" she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. "Why does your horn have a sharp point?"
She was curious about Hippo. "Why do you have red eyes?" she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. "What does Crocodile eat for dinner?" she asked.
"Never ask a question like that!" said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to Baby Elephant. "Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner," squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
"Hello," said a stone near the river bank. "Hello," said Baby Elephant. "Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?" she asked.
"Bend down and I will tell you," said the stone. "Lower, lower," said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, "Snap!" Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws. "Crocodile will eat you for dinner!" squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, "Thud!" she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
“Niyakwati yini lekwenteka ngeLusuku lweLusha ngemnyaka wanga 1976?” Gogo ubuta ebatukulu bakhe, Buhle naVusi.“Kwenteka umlandvo ngamhla ti- 16 Inhlaba ngemnyaka wanga 1976 eSoweto!” Kusho gogo.
“Bekusekuseni ngamhla ti- 16 Inhlaba ngemnyaka wanga 1976. Bekumnyaka wami wekugcina esikolweni.Lelo lusuku lolwagucula umlandvo,” kuchubeka gogo.
“Sasibafundzi betikolo letahlukahlukene taseSoweto.Sasihlele kumasha sisuka etikolweni tetfu silibangise enkhundleni yetemidlalo i-Orlando.Sasihlele imashi lenekuthula.”
“Nanibhikishelani?” kubuta Buhle.Gogo uyachaza, “Umbuso welibandlululo bewusicindzetela kutsi sifundze ngelulwimi lweSibhunu, besingahambisani nalowo mtsetfo. Satfukutsela kakhulu!”
“Sayisukumela indzaba yekukhululeka kwebafundzi belibala lelimnyama eNingizimu Afrika.Phela besifuna imfundvo lencono kuwonkhewonkhe.Futsi nemfundvo lelinganayo kuwonkhewonkhe eNingizimu Afrika.”
“Kwase kwentekani?” kubuta Vusi.“Sasimasha silibangise emhlanganweni enkhundleni yetemidlalo i-Orlando. Tinkhulungwane tebafundzi tahlanganyela kulemashi. Sasijabule kakhulu!” kuphendvula gogo.
“Sisamasha njalo, emaphoyisa asihlasela!Asiphosa ngagesi lokhalisa tinyembeti. Tinja temaphoyisa tasihlasela!Setama kutfulisa sachubeka nekuhamba.”
“Bacala kudubula ngetinhlavu.Kunesitfombe lesidvumile lesatfusa umhlaba wonkhe.Sitfombe saHector Pieterson acukulwe ngumngani wakhe,” kusho gogo ngekudzabuka.
“Kwagcina njani gogo?” kubuta Buhle naVusi ngemavi laphasi.“Lombhikisho waseSoweto wabhebhetseka kulolonkhe live. Ebafundzi labanyenti nebasebenti bahlanganyela kulombhikisho.Ebantfu kuwo wonkhe umhlaba basekela lombhikisho,” kuphendvula gogo.
“Lolutfutfuva lwaseSoweto lwalubalulekile ekulweni nelubandlululo. Sabita lelosuku ngekutsi ‘Lusuku lwaseSoweto’. Laba liholide lemphakatsi lavelonkhe ngemnyaka wanga 1995,” gogo utjela Buhle naVusi.Ngabo 1990, kwaba nemibhikisho lemikhulu yetibhelu telusha,” kukhumbula gogo.
“NgeLusuku lweLusha lwaVelonkhe, ebantfu baseNingizimu Afrika bahlonipha ebantfu labasha lababulawa kulombhikisho wemnyaka wanga 1976.”“Sikhumbula ebantfu labasha labasita kucedza lubandlululo,” kusho gogo ngekutigcabha.
“Yonkhe iminyaka ngeLusuku lweLusha kuba khona imicimbi, imihlangano nemakhonsethi eveni lonkhe.Kufanele singawukhohlwa umlandvo welive letfu,” kusho gogo aphetsa indzaba.Uyamamatseka ugona Buhle naVusi.
Rremogolo o bogetse Letsatsi la Poelano mo thelebišeneng kwa lapeng.“Rremogolo, Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK) ke eng?” Gone poelano ke eng?” ga botsa Puseletso.“O botsa dipotso di le dintsi ka nako e le nngwe. Reetsa, ke go rute!” ga bua rremogolo.
MK e ne e le batlhabani ba ANC. Ba ne ba lwantsha puso ya tlhaolele. Tlhaolele e ne e kgetholola batho Bantsho,”ga tlhalosa rremogolo.Gompieno batho ba itumetse ka gonne ke letsatsi la tshwarelano le poelano,” a bua.
“A o gakologelwa fa o ne o sa buisane le Dikeledi beke yotlhe?” Ga botsa rremogolo.Puseletso a koma ka tlhogo.“Ka bonya lo ne lwa nna ditsala gape?”Puseletso a koma gape ka tlhogo.“Eo ke yona maitshwarelano le poelano,”ga ngeba rremogolo.
“Letsatsi la 16 Sedimonthole ke letsatsi la maitshwarelano le poelano,” rremogolo a tswelelapele.“Letsatsi le, le na hisitori e telele. Kgang e simolola ka ntwa e e neng ya diragala bogologolo ka la 16 Sedimonthole 1838.”
“Ka letsatsi leo mo hisitoring, batlhabani ba Kgosi Dingane wa MaZulu le MaVoortrekkere ba ne ba lwa ntwa e kgolo gaufi le noka ya Ncome.”“Go ne ga fenya mang?” ga botsa Puseletso.
Rremogolo a araba, “MaVoortrekker ba ne ba fenya.Ke nako e telele ba keteka phenyo e ka la 16 Sedimonthole. Ba le bitsa Letsatsi la Maikano.
Jaanong, ka 1962 ka la 16 Sedimonthole, Umkhonto we Sizwe o ne wa tlhamiwa.E ne e le masole a ANC a a neng e ikemiseditse go lwantsha puso ya tlhaolele.
“Rremogolo, tota ke eng se se neng sa tlhotlheletsa Umkhonto we Sizwe go lwa morago ga dinyaga tse dintsi tsa tlhaolele?” ga botsa Puseletso.“Go ne go na le mabaka a mmalwanyana. Se se diragetseng kwa mogwantong wa Didompas, e ne e le lebaka le le golo,” ga bua rremogolo.“Dompas ke eng?” ga botsa Puseletso.
Rremogolo a araba, “Dompas ke pasa ya bogologolo. Batho Bantsho botlhe ba ne ba pateletswa go rwala pasa e.“Ka 1960, ka mogwanto wa kagiso wa go gana go rwala dipasa, maphodisa a ne a tlhasela bagwanti. Maphodisa a tlhaolele a ne a bolaya gape a gobatsa batho, kwa Sharpville mo Gauteng.”
“Dikgotlhang tsa bogologolo di ne di kgaogantse batho Basweu le batho Bantsho,” rremogolo a busa mowa.“Botsala bo ka agiwe fela mo godimo ga nnete. Go tshwanetse go itsewe gore go ne go diragetse eng magareng ga batho Basweu le batho Bantsho ka ntlha ya tlhaolele,” a bua.
“A mme go bonolo go tshwarelana morago ga dintwa tse di kana?” ga botsa Puseletso.“Nnyaa! Ga go bonolo. Fela, gore re tswelele pele, tshwarelano le poelano di botlhokwa magareng ga batho,” rremogolo a araba.“Poelano ga e tle ka bonako. Poelano e tsaya nako e telele,” a tlaleletsa.
“Fa mongwe a dirile phoso, o tshwanetse a bua nnete, mme a kopa maitshwarelo mo mothong yo o mo diretseng phoso. Morago ga moo, ba ka simolola go siamisa botsalano ba bona,” ga tlhalosa rremogolo.“O ne o reeditse sentle. A re bogele se o ratang go se bogela mo thelebišeneng!”ga ngeba rremogolo.
One day,  Rabbit was walking by the riverside.
Hippo was there too,  going for a stroll and eating some nice green grass.
Hippo didn't see that Rabbit was there and she accidentally stepped on Rabbit's foot. Rabbit started screaming at Hippo,  "You Hippo! Can't you see that you're stepping on my foot?"
Hippo apologised to Rabbit,  "I'm so sorry. I didn't see you. Please forgive me!" But Rabbit wouldn't listen and he shouted at Hippo,  "You did that on purpose! Someday,  you'll see! You're going to pay!"
Rabbit went to find Fire and said,  "Go,  burn Hippo when she comes out of the water to eat grass. She stepped on me!"  Fire answered,  "No problem,  Rabbit,  my friend. I'll do just what you ask."
Later,  Hippo was eating grass far from the river when,  "Whoosh!" Fire burst into flame. The flames began to burn Hippo's hair.
Hippo started to cry and ran for the water. All her hair was burned off by the fire. Hippo kept crying,  "My hair has burned in the fire! My hair is all gone! My beautiful hair!"
Rabbit was happy that Hippo's hair was burned. And to this day,  for fear of fire,  the hippo never goes far from the water.
“Bafundzi ngifuna kunicocela ngalomunye Sosayensi lobalulekile walapha emzansi Afrika,” kusho Thishela Mpilo“Lo Sosayensi wacala imphilo yakhe kulesinye setigodzi letincane tase Limpopo lowatsi kamuva waba nguSosayensi losetulu.”Thishela wachubeka watsi, “Khumbulani, iPhysiks iyisayensi yetemvelo lesuselwa etibalweni.”
Thishela uyachubeka, “Lichawe letfu lesayensi lesitawukhuluma ngalo lamuhla ngu Mmantsae Moche Diale.”“Watalelwa e Ga-Masemola lekuyindzawo lesemakhaya e Limpopo. Wafundza esikolweni i Sekobetlane Maphutha.”“Bekunemapali lamakhulu agesi lebeka fakwe adzabula ekhatsi lapha esigodzini sakubo. Kepha kulesigodzi sakubo bekute gesi.”
“Asengumtfwana abenenshisakalo yekwati ngemandla agesi nekutsi atfolakala njani. Abekakwati kutsi wonkhe umuntfu kufanele abe nemandla lanele agesi kute akhone kuhlangabetana netidzingo takhe.”Thishela waphumula kancane nendzaba yakhe wabuta, “Iyini leminye imitfombo yemandla agesi?”
“Emalahle angumtfombo lobalulekile. Sishisa emalahle kute sente gesi,” kusho Nhlavu.“Yebo, kepha umhlaba wetfu uphelelwa ngemalahle naleminye imitfombo yemandla agesi langakhoni kuphindze isebentiseke.“Lilanga nemoya imitfombo lengaphindza isebentiseke,” kungeta Sphe, nathishela wakhombisa kuvumelana naye ngenhloko.
Thishela wachubeka nendzaba yakhe, “Ebuncaneni Mmantsae bekakwati kutsi ufuna tindlela tekutsi wonkhe umutfu atfole gesi longabiti kakhulu futsi lohlobile atfolakale etikwe mitfombo lengaphindze isebentiseke.”“Wafundza tibalo nesifundvo seSayensi yetemvelo esikolweni, futsi abekayitsandza I physiks, abekakwati kutsi ufuna kufundza I Physiks eNyuvesi,” kwasho Thishela.
“Bantfu babuta Mmantsae, ‘Ucabanga kutsi yini lotayenta nge Physiks? Nje ungawutfola umsebenti?’ Bamcedza emandla.”“Ufundzele ticu tetesayensi etikweni letemfundvo, kute abe ngu thishela we Sayensi. Abekanenshisakalo futsi yeku fundza ngemitfombo yemandla agesi lengaphindza isebentiseke,” kusho Thishela.
“Thishela, ngubani umuntfu lebekabuke kuye Mmantsae njengelichawe lakhe ngalesosikhatsi?” kubuta Sphe.“Bekulidlanzana labomake lebebasebenta emkhakheni we physiks, futsi bebabancane kakhulu bomake belibala lelimnyama kuwo lomkhakha,” kuphendula Thishela.“Mmantsae usebente nabo Sosayensi labadvuna kuphela. Bekute bomake base Mzansi Afrika lebekangabuka kubo njengemachawe akhe ngaleso sikhatsi.
“Ngemuva kweminyaka leminyenti Mmantsae afundza waba ngu Profesa weteSayensi. Nyalo unguThishela nemcwaningi wase Nyuvesi,” thishela Mpillo utjela likilasi.“Ulichawe lawo wonkhe umuntfu longumake welibala lelimnyama loku sayensi, ikakhulu labaku Physiks.”“Wenta lucwaningo lolubalulekile,” kusho thishela.
Thishela wachaza, “Lucwaningo lwakhe lugcile ekutsini atfole tindlela tekutfola emandla latfolakala elangeni ngebunyenti, nekuwagcina lawo mandla.“Emandla elilanga lagciniwe angasentjentiswa kuniketa gesi etindzaweni tasemakhaya.”“Emandla agesi latfolakala elangeni awabiti kakhulu futsi ayaphindza asebentiseke.”
Thishela wabuta, “Ningakwati kungitjela kutsi kusho kutsini, lokungaphindze kusebentiseke nalokungeke kuphindze kusebentiseke?”“Emandla agesi langaphindze asebentiseke ngulamandla langapheli,” kusho Ntando.“Emandla agesi lawa langaphindzi asebentiseke ayaphela njengalawa emalahle langakhoni kuphindze asebentiseke,” kusho Vusiwe.
Sifundvo siyaphela.Thishela uyaphetsa, “Mmantsae uhola licembu lebancwaningi labacwaninga ngemandla agesi lohlobile nalaluhlata.”“Sifiso sabo ngalolucwaningo kukhicita emaseli langakhona kutsatsa emandla agesi lamanyenti elangeni awayise ebantfwini.”
Basacoca likilasi ebafundzi, Thishela Mpilo utsi, “Sifiso sa Professor Diale kubona bomake labanyenti bafundza I physiks. Nginelitsemba lekutsi linyenti lematfombatana lapha atawufundza tifundvo te Sayensi ne Tibalo!”“Kanjalo nebafana futsi!” kumamatseka Thishela.
——Leina la nkgonne ke Resego.O mogolo mo go nna ka dingwaga di le pedi.Ke nkgonne.
O nthusa go apara diaparo tsa sekolo mo mosong.
O tsamaya le nna go ya sekolong ka letsatsi le letsatsi.Mme gompieno ga a ikutlwe monate.
Nkgonne o a lwala.Ijoo! Ke ile go dira jang?Ga ke a itumela le eseng!
Mo tseleng go ya sekolong, ke ne ka kopane le Tumi.Re ne ra tsamaya mmogo.Se, se ne sa dira gore ke ikutlwe botokanyana.
Kwa sekolong morutabana o ne a nkopelela pina.Se, se ne sa dira gore ke itumele.
Ka nako ya go tshameka, Boipelo o ne a tshameka le nna.Se, se ne sa intumedisa tota!
Kwa bofelong jwa letsatsi ke ne ke le mosetsana yo o itumetseng mo sekolong.Ga ke kgone go itshoka go tlotlela nkgonne ka letsatsi la me!
This is Natabo. She has six brothers.
Her parents give her a small pot. She loves it.
One day her brothers break the pot.
Natabo cannot find her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away. She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Please come down," they ask.
Her brothers sing,  "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
When Rohan woke up, he began to play with Jimmy, his dog.“There’s something you should do first!” said Riya, his big sister. “BRUSH YOUR TEETH!”WOOF!
“I don’t want to brush my teeth! Jimmy doesn’t brush his teeth!”“Animals take care of their teeth too, but in other ways! We must brush our teeth to keep germs away!”“Germs?”“Germs are very tiny creatures that you cannot see. If you don’t brush properly, they stay in your mouth and hurt you!”“Ouch!”“YES! That’s why we must take good care of our teeth by brushing twice a day - morning and night!”“But brushing is no fun!”“I’ll tell you a secret, Rohan! Psst…”  Rohan smiled.
Mummy called out, “It’s breakfast time!” “There’s something we should do first!” said Riya. “WASH OUR HANDS!”WOOF!
“But Jimmy never washes his hands!”Riya laughed, “He doesn’t use his hands or paws to eat like we do! We must wash our hands with soap to get rid of germs.”“Are germs on our hands too?”“Germs are EVERYWHERE!”WOOF!“Aaaah-chhhooo!” Riya covered her mouth with her hands as she sneezed.“Don't do that! My teacher says that we should sneeze into our sleeve, not our hands!" said Rohan.“Why?”“Because when we sneeze into our hands, germs stick to them. If we don’t wash our hands, we spread germs and make others sick!”
“Here comes Germy!” Riya shouted, chasing Rohan and waving herdirty hands.  “EEEEEEEK!”WOOF!
Later Riya showed Rohan the proper way to wash hands. “Wet your hands and turn off the tap. Then rub in some soap on the palms, the back of the hands and between the fingers. Scrub hands for twenty seconds! Now, it’s time to rinse off and dry!”“But that’s a long time!”“Remember my secret?”Rohan smiled.
When they came back home after playing, Riya nudged Rohan, “There’s something we should do first!”Mummy teased, “Play some more?”“TAKE A BATH!”“Mummy, don’t you know that germs are everywhere? We can’t see them, but they stick to our skin and clothes!”“That’s why we must bathe every day…” “…to get rid of them!”
"Start by getting yourself wet,” said Mummy. “Then apply soap all over!” Riya and Rohan giggled as Mummy’s ticklish fingers soaped them up.“Then it’s time to rinse off!”“And dry with a clean towel!”“SUPERCLEAN!”WOOF! “It’s Jimmy’s turn next!”
“Do you want to listen to a story?” asked Papa.
“There’s something we should do first!” reminded Riya. “Tidy UP!”Rohan yawned. “Do we have to?”“Remember you couldn’t find your ball the other day? Putting things away in the proper place makes it easy to find them later!”“And keeps our house neat!” “You both are so smart!” said Papa proudly. “Bedtime!”“Papa! There’s something we should do first!” said Riya, pulling Rohan along.“Make the germs disappear with our magic secret!”Rohan nodded.
A few minutes later, Mummy and Papa heard a familiar tune. “So that’s your secret!” said Papa. “Humming a song to make brushing fun!”“And while washing our hands too!”“That’s a great idea!” said Mummy.WOOF!Rohan and Riya enjoy taking care of themselves. Do you? They make up a game with the germs and guess who wins?
Germs say, yucky, mucky and dirty is FUN!I say, I brush and wash and I know I have won!Germs say, never bathe, it’s a waste of time!I say, smelling nice with soap is so fine.Naughty germ says don’t pick up your things, The house looks better that way.I say, I tidy up because I like my thingsThat is a good way to end my day!And I feel better in every wayI feel better in every way! I FEEL BETTER IN EVERY WAY!!!!!Now make up your secret song and hum it when you have to do boring things!
Sonu wore a blue shirt after his bath. Monu and Rina wore blue socks.
Oh,we are all dressed in the same colour today!Come, let us see some other colours!
Hereare Dadi's red chillies, don't touch them!
Aha,Bholu is cutting purple brinjals.
Rani Didi has sunshineyellowlemons.
Colours are fun to see. Now toeat something colourful too! Yummy! Should we eat a pink chuski?
Or a creamy white kulfi?
We can drink tangy greenjaljeera.
Or we can have sweet browndates?
But Ramu's guavas are thebest.
Green on the outside,pinkinside, with pure white salt and red chilli powder!
Once upon a time the rabbit was a great friend of the monkey.
One day the rabbit said,  "Let's go for a walk and look for something to eat." The monkey agreed,  but it was a trap for him!
They went to a field of maize and started to eat it.
But the clever rabbit had spoken to the owners of the farm,  to catch the monkey and show him he was foolish.
The clever rabbit started shouting,  "Robbers! Robbers! Your maize is all gone!" And he jumped up and ran away.
Suddenly the owners appeared and found the monkey trying to run away. But he has a long tail and it was stopping him.
The owners followed him,  shouting,  "Stop! Stop! We saw you,  you are the monkey."
But they caught him and started beating him.
He couldn't stand the pain so he said,  "I was with my friend Rabbit. He is the one who invited me."
But the owners cut his tail off and told him,  "Go and tell your friend that we cut off your tail!"
Then they went to the rabbit's house and cooked the monkey's tail to eat. The rabbit invited the monkey for lunch.
At the end of the meal the rabbit asked the monkey if he knew what he had eaten. The foolish monkey answered,  "No I don't!"
The rabbit told him that he had eaten his own tail and then ran away. And from then on they became enemies!
I like my teacher very much.
She is beautiful. She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She braided her hair pretty nice.
She placed colorful beads in her hair.
The beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, could you please braid my hair just like my teacher's?
When I grow older, I will also place colorful beads on my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie,  Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can see the huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing. "There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone,  I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes,  12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says. "I like counting in 4s," says Duksie,  "it's quicker."  "I'm going to count in 3s,  just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look,  there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did you pack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asks the children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side,  to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see,  how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself,  "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen and get a surprise for the children!"
Back at the farm,  Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them,  "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what it I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what she might bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of yellow apples falls onto the table. "See,  I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children,  "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. The count: 2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  and 1 apple left over, Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next,  they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted.  "Yay!" shout the children."
Umhlangano waqhubeka naxasibeni kubonakala zingekho iindlovu.“Sizoqhuba nevoti noba zingekho iindlovu. Sizobeka inkosi namhlanje,” watsho uSikhova.
Izilwanyana zavotela ukuba inkosi kuzoba nguMpovani.UMpovani wavumela phezulu nakubeni heyi zothwala omxinzi.“Luxanduva olufaka umsebenzi omninzi,” waacinga.
Iindaba zoba uMpovani wenyulwe uba abeyinkosi zahamba ngokutshetsha.Zifikile ezindlebeni zenkosana yeendlovu.Yamcunukisa kakhulu inkosana.
Inkosana yeendlovu yaya kufuna ukudla ehlathini.Ngokuziqqaja, ngamakhulu amatshamba yayizazi uba inamandla futhi ingenandaba kwanampovani.Enoba heyihamba kumgade wazo na kakade, yona heyidlisela.
Ngamandla esiyinawo, inkosana isiphule isiphunzi kwaphuma iimpovani ezininzi!INkosi uMpovani uchola ithuba angene kuwo umboko.“Kumele uhloniphe wonke umntu,” watsho uMpovani eyiluma inkosana yeendlovu.
Inkosana yeendlovu yagxwala yacela utshweli ngelithi izokwenza kwasani exelwa nguMpovani mayingayibulali.Indlovu yagoduka itshwencile ingaphathanga kudla, suka zee mekenxe ezinye iindlovu zixakiwe uba kwenzekeni.Yachaza konke okuyehleleyo kunye nezethembiso azenze kuMpovani.
Ezinye iindlovu zagcobela ukuthola inkosana yazo iphila.Zangabi sabi nandaba nokulawula kwabo ke nguMpovani.Kanjalo ulawulo lucholwa zimbovani noba zincane.
In a tiny village of  Lumela, lives a little boy called Chipego.  Chipego lives with his father, mother and his  little sister Mutinta.  There is one more special member of the family, Pendo the cow. Chipego helps his father to look after Pendo in exchange for pocket money that he uses to buy books. Meet Chipego. He is 10 years old and in Grade 5 at the village school. Chipego always comes top of his class. "What's his secret?" his schoolmates ask themselves."He's excellent in reading and writing. How does he do it?" they wonder. Chipego tells them it is because he reads lots of books. While they waste their time doing nothing, he spends all his free time reading.
Chipego sometimes earns K80.00 a week in pocket money. He spends most of the pocket money on books at the second-hand book shop in his village.So how does Chipego earn enough pocket money for these books? Read on to find out.
Meet Pendo, the family's milking cow. She produces over 20 litres of milk per day. Chipego's father sells the milk.A cow needs food and water, and time to graze in the field. So each day after school, Chipego helps with this work. Chipego's father gives him pocket money for the work he does. And it is this money that Chipego saves to buy books each week.
First, Chipego gives Pendo a bunch of carrots. He gives her exactly eight carrots a day. Each day he picks the carrots from his father's vegetable garden, enough for a day at a time.You can work it out. You will find that Pendo eats nearly 60 carrots a week. Can you tell exactly how many?
After that, Chipego takes Pendo to graze in the fields. His father warned him to watch the time and give Pendo not  more than three quarters of an hour to graze.Pendo usually starts grazing at about14:15 hrs, so that Chipego can take her back to the milking shed at 15 hours. In winter when it gets dark earlier, Chipego may start grazing earlier, around 13:30 hrs.
Next Chipego gives Pendo water. Without water Pendo won't produce milk, no matter how much Chipego feeds her. Chipego fetches buckets of water from the village pump because there isn't one nearby.Pendo's trough holds about 30 litres of water. Chipego's bucket only holds 5 litres. So to fill the trough Chipego has to make many trips. Can you work out how many trips he has to make?
Then, Chipego takes Pendo to his father to get her daily 12 kg bag of grain. Chipego calculates that's almost 90 kg a week.Each bag costs K39.00. Chipego works out the cost of grain for each week. First he works out the cost of 7 bags at K40.00, which makes K280.00 Then he subtracts K7.00 to get K273.00 "That's over K1 000 a month!" Chipego estimates. Is he correct?
Chipego's father milks Pendo twice a day. She produces about 24 litres of milk a day, so about 12 litres for each milking.Sometimes Chipego helps with the milking but it is not as easy as it looks. "One day," he thinks to himself, "I will have my own cows and I will have to do all the milking myself."
His father pours the milk from the big bucket into smaller two litre cans or one litre bottles. He then sells the milk for K8.00 a litre.Once a week Chipego's father donates 25 litres of milk to Bulela School feeding scheme. Each child gets a quarter litre of this milk. That means that 100 children get milk on this day.
For each litre of milk sold, his father gives Chipego 50 ngwee. That doesn't sound like a lot, but if his father sells 24 litres a day, it adds up to quite a bit. Can you tell how much?Chipego saves his money until Saturday when he makes a trip to the book shop. Each book costs less than k10.00, so in a good week, he can buy quite a few.
Chipego also loves to drink Pendo's milk. His father says that milk helps to build strong bones and teeth and makes a person fit and healthy.So by drinking milk and eating lots of vegetables from his father's garden, Chipego is strong and healthy. He seldom gets sick and never goes hungry. His mother loves making mabisi using Pendo's milk too. His young sister enjoys adding the milk to her chibwantu! Hmmm! Yummy!
Chipego never forgets to thank Pendo at the end of each day. He rewards her with extra carrots or spinach leaves that he finds lying around the garden."Thank you Pendo, you are my best friend! It is thanks to you that I am strong, healthy and clever. If not for you I would never be able to buy all the books that help me be top of my class." One day I will be a veterinary  doctor because of you!Pendo is very lucky because Mutinta, Chipego's mother and Father also rewards her! What an amazing cow!
This is Jaaka the fisherman from Naminya.
He fishes on the river Nile.
He has a boat,  fishing net and a hook.
He always wakes up very early in the morning to catch the Nile perch.
At around 10am,  he's selling his catch in Jinja central market.
Jaaka what happened? Was it a loss? He's so sad.
"Today the situation is bad. The Nile breeze did not permit me to fish. And one perch swam away with my hook."
"But I have hope that tomorrow will be good,  because I've bought a new hook."
Kwakulusuku olutshisa kakhulu. UDada wankcwila emanzini. UHobe wayecinga, “Ingathi kumandi ukugqubha.”“Hobe, uyakhanuka ukugqubha?” watsho uDada etshonisa intloko emanzini, aphinde avumbuke, emfila.“Yiza ndikubeleke, ndikufundise ukugqubha.”
UHobe shwiii wabaleka wayoma phezu komthi xa kufuneka etshonise intloko emanzini.UHobe wacinga ngokukhiyanxeka, “Ngeke ndikwazi ukugqubha njengoDada.”Wasala yena uDada emanzini.
“O yhini Hobe! Undijaliselani? Kutheni unditshiya ndodwa emanzini? Bendithi ngaba uba uyakukhanuka ukugqubha njengam,” wakhalaza uDada.UHobe waaphendula, “Ndoyika ukutshona.”“Bendicinguba ubufuna ukufunda ukugqubha njengam,” watsho uDada.
“Tswi Tswi! Tswi! Dada, nam mandikufundise ukubhabhazela. Ukugqubha kunzima!”Shwiii! Wabhabhazela uHobe wayoma etyeni elikhulu. Walandela uDada.Nanko uHobe phezu komthi omde. Wasala engakwazi ukulandela uDada.
UDada waziva ekhiyanxekile. Wazicingela engxamile, “Hayibo kutheni! UHobe akandicingeli.Mna ndilidada hayi ihobe. Mna ndiqhele ukugqubha andikuqhelanga ukubhabhazela,” waacinga nzulu engxamile.UHobe wafuna ukumduduza umnganakhe.
Baahlala phantsi elityeni bethule.Ekugqibeleni uHobe wathi, “Mngani, namhlanje ndifunde uba noba ndikhanuka, ngeke ndigqubhe njengwawe,” watsho uHobe.“Nam Hobe undifundise isifundo. Mawubhabhazela undenza ndikhanuke ukuba nguwe. Kodwa ndibonile namhlanje uba idada lahlukile kwintaka.”Bawolana uDada noHobe.
“Singamadada, thina singamadada. Siyaluthand’udaka, ma sigqubh’echibini, sitshonisa iintloko, siphume sesisithi, ‘Kwaa kwaa kwaa gxadada! Kwaa kwaa kwaa gxadada!’”“Hanibheke ezo ntakana. Zibhabhazela ngamaphikwana zithi, ‘Tsiyoyo, tsiyoyo, tsiyoyo!’”
This is Cat. This is Dog.
Cat and Dog want to draw. Cat and Dog want to colour. Cat and Dog want to make art. Dog starts.He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a square.
First Dog draws an oval. The oval is the body of Cat.Wow, that is simple!
Then he draws two triangles on top of the oval.The two triangles are the ears of Cat and he draws a black triangle in the oval. The black triangle is the nose of Cat and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of Cat.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is easy!
Then he draws the mouth of Cat. The mouth is a line.It looks like the letter ‘w’ and he draws the hairs of Cat. Three hairs on the left side and three hairs on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Cat. The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Cat.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Cat. The tail is a long line.
At last he draws some stripes on the body of Cat and he colours the body orange. Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is beautiful!
Now it is Cat's turn. He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a rectangle.
First Cat draws an oval. The oval is the body of Dog.Wow, that is good!
Then he draws two black forms on top of the oval.The two black forms are the ears of Dog and he draws a black circle in the oval.The black circle is the nose of Dog and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of dog.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is perfect!
Then he draws the mouth of Dog. The mouth is a line. The shape is again the letter ‘w’ and he draws some dots around the mouth of Dog. Three on the left side and three on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Dog.The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Dog.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Dog.The tail looks like a flower.
At last he draws some black circles on the body of Dog and he colours the body yellow.Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is wonderful!
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye drawing of Cat.Bye bye Dog.Bye bye drawing of Dog.
Nestled in the Kingdom of the Zulu is a magnificent place called the Valley.
A little girl called Jabulile lives here. Jabulile was always a happy child. She was also curious, and full of questions about life.Everything fascinated her.
Jabulile’s father was a mielie farmer.Her mother was a teacher. They taught her to dream big dreams. Jabulile’s biggest dream was to help people.
One awful day, the clouds began to gather over the Valley. Everything grew dark and grey. An ugly storm swept over the land.
Great gusts of wind blew the roofs off the huts. All the animals lost their homes. It was a very sad day.
The village folk cried, “What shall we do now?”“All the crops are ruined!” cried the farmers. “Our homes are gone!” said the elders. All hope seemed lost. But Jabulile remembered something her wise father once told her.
Jabulile started speaking to the villagers.“The storm only hurts us,” she said, “because of the way we choose to see it. If you look up, the sun is shining again. It is a new day.“After every storm, there must be a rainbow!” she shouted excitedly.
The villagers saw the rainbow and they began to smile. It stood as a promise that the storm was over.
The villagers rebuilt their homes. Farmers planted new crops. The grass grew greener than ever before.
Once again there was hope and happiness in the Valley.
A long time ago,  the king of the bush was Mr Lion.
He sent his animals to stop the noise coming from a small lake in the bush. But they did not succeed!
An elephant volunteered to stop it. The elephant was sent out as a guard.
At midnight the noise began and the elephant started killing the frogs. He did the same thing the next day.
After a couple of weeks,  King Lion was happy because the elephant had stopped the noise.
But about a month later,  they saw a lot of insects on their farm.
King Lion asked the elephant to call the frogs to come and eat the insects.
The elephant was very nervous because he had killed all of them. He said,  "Sorry,  sorry,  I k- k- k- killed them!"
Then King Lion said: Elephant,  I asked you to stop the noise,  not to kill the frogs. And the elephant was put in prison for many years!
And the king told all the animals to always do exactly what he said.
One day a very clever baby was born in Gungululu in the Eastern Cape. Her name was Sindiwe Magona. She was the oldest of eight children.
At night, her grandmother told magical stories about ogres and giants, animals of the forests, great beasts, and little creatures of the veld. It was Sindiwe’s favourite time.
Sindiwe loved school and she dreamed about being a teacher.
When Sindiwe became a teenager, her family organised a feast to celebrate. She was given special things to wear and a wise old man sang a praise song to her. (Blessings, long life! May your ancestors guard you!)
Sindiwe trained to be a teacher. She was very excited to teach at her first school. But there weren’t enough schools for black children and they had no desks or books to write in. This made Sindiwe feel scared. How could she be a good teacher when the children had nowhere to sit?
She left the school to work as a cleaner.She worked in four different houses. Sometimes the people there treated her badly and Sindiwe became very unhappy.
All this time Sindiwe studied. Her hard work paid off! She won a scholarship to study at a university in New York. She and her three small children packed their bags and flew across the sea to the United States of America.
In New York, Sindiwe studied to become a social worker. She wanted to help families make their lives better.
When she finished studying, the United Nations gave Sindiwe a job. Most of the countries in the world meet at the United Nations to talk about their problems.
Sindiwe told the world about South Africa, and how hard it was for black people living there. The people at the United Nations loved to listen to Sindiwe’s stories. They wanted to learn more and more about South Africans. Perhaps, together, they could help to change things in South Africa.
She worked at the United Nations for twenty years while her children grew into adults. But Sindiwe missed the country where she was born. She wanted to tell her stories to the people at home.So she packed her luggage, got on a plane and flew back over the sea to Cape Town.
Sindiwe’s love for books and stories have helped her write piles and piles of books. And children and grown-ups love to read her stories. Many people call her Nomabali because she’s always writing, telling and reading stories.
Every day when eight-year-old Sisanda gets home from school,  she changes out of her uniform,  eats her lunch and plays a game of umlabalaba with her grandfather. They have so much fun flying their "cows" around the board that she doesn't want to stop. But then he reminds her that she wants to become a bank manager one day when she grows up.
For her last birthday,  Sisanda had a special treat – her parents got permission for her to have a party at the game reserve. The giraffes at the reserve were curious about this group of people. They stretched out their long necks for the best view of the party and they even seemed to want some of the birthday cake! Sisanda loved the giraffes. All animals were special to her,  but it was the quiet and gentle giraffes that stole her heart. She could spend all day watching them.
"Oh no!" said Sisanda starting to cry. "I wish there was something I could do. The baby giraffe must be crying just like me." Sisanda cried and cried. Her mother tried to comfort her. She even read Sisanda an extra story at bedtime to help her forget how sorry she felt for that baby giraffe. Eventually,  Sisanda drifted off to sleep to the sound of her mama's voice.
They found the baby giraffe standing alone. His willowy neck drooped and his big brown eyes looked dull. Sisanda stood as close to him as she could. She opened her small bag and took out a book. Then,  to her parents' surprise,  she began to read to the baby giraffe. He turned his head towards her voice and listened as if he could understand every word. At first,  Sisanda's parents thought reading to a giraffe was a strange thing to do,  but they changed their minds when they saw how peaceful he looked − his gentle eyes looking at Sisanda.
On the day of the outing,  forty Grade 3 children waited eagerly for the reserve gates to open. Then Sisanda proudly led everyone to Thokozani. Some of the children looked at the tall giraffe in amazement. Others giggled nervously. Their teacher,  Miss Khanyile,  just smiled.
One day a rat saw a Biiigggg Bun... "Ah, ha... what a lovely feast. Let me take this to my hollow," she said.
She pushed the bun from the back. AAAAeeeeee!!!huh!!!It did not move.
The Rat pushed the bun from forward. Did it move? Oh, not at all!
The Rat pushed the bun from right. Oh no, still the same.
The rat ran and pushed the bun from the left. Did it dare to move? no, not at all!!
"Isn't this crazy" the rat thought. "Let me tie a thread and then move, may be" jumped the rat.
The rat came out with a thread, within no time.  She tied the bun with a long piece of thread and,...now started to pull!
"Ah, i can't" cried the tired rat. But, she has an idea!"Umm, But let me just eat it here," she said and bit a piece of bun. "Yummm, so tasty", she said. She ate two pieces now. And, ate a bit more. And, few more too. It ate so much that the size of the bun is now small!!
The rat started pushing the bun again. The eatery just slipped to the hollow. "Ah! Finally, it is in"The rat just couldn't stop grinning. But, Oh, ho!! Now, the rat's stomach is full!
The rat tried to get into the hollow. But, she just can't!!
The rat sits outside the hollow. Her stomach is so full that, she just cannot enter the hollow!! "Huh, i ate too much," the rat cried.
What will school be like today?I can't wait to see my friends!How will we make up the lessons we missed?
When lockdown started, I was afraid.Mum couldn't go to work.There wasn't enough money to buy food.
Mum and Dad were arguing too much!And you and I were fighting a lot, too.
Mr. Khumalo was very sick. I was afraid Dad would get sick, too.We prayed for them and God helped them.And then God provided us with food!
Lord Jesus,Please help our family.Please be with all our friends and help them, too.Thank you for loving us and hearing our prayers. Amen.
"God is our strong refuge; he is truly our helper in times of trouble."Psalm 46:1
Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.
The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.
Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find the right man.
Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. This herb would heal her father's wound. But the lake was filled with dangerous spirits.
Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. Some men did not return from the lake at all.
Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" But Nangila had made up her mind.
On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."
When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.
Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived into the lake. She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.
When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She was afraid, but she sang the song the old woman taught her: I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here, in the land where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers.
Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.
Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. The entire village danced and praised Nangila.
It happened one year that the rain didn't fall. The trees dried up and died. The rivers disappeared and the water evaporated. People and animals were dying from hunger and thirst.
The chief animals met to talk about the situation. Lion said, "Let's call everyone together and discuss the idea of digging a well. We can drink from its waters."Elephant agreed and went off to spread the news to the other animals.
All the animals gathered to discuss the situation. Lion began, saying, "My brothers and sisters, this year the rain has not fallen. Everyone is dying from hunger and thirst. Let us dig a well so that we can all drink from it."
The animals all agreed and immediately grabbed hoes, shovels and picks. They started digging a well.
Hare had not come, but the other animals continued without him. They dug. And they dug. And they dug some more. And finally they hit water. When they struck water, Lion said, "Why did Hare not come to help? He will not drink from this water!"
Later Hare came and saw the well. He said, "Hello?" But he heard nothing. So he went in and splashed around in the water for a while.
The next day, when the animals came, they saw that their well was a big mess. The water was nothing but mud. They asked, "Who would do such a thing?" Someone said, "I bet it was Hare, because when we were digging the well he was nowhere to be found."
The animals decided to leave a guard at the well. They chose Baboon to keep an eye on things. Hare came to the well that night, and said, "Hello?" And Baboon replied, "Hello!" So Hare came over to Baboon, saying "Try this!" Hare gave Baboon some honey. And Baboon let him take some water. Just then, Hyena arrived and saw Hare drinking.
The next day, Hyena went and told all the animals that Hare had taken water from the well. They chose Turtle to guard the well. Turtle was on the job when Hare arrived at night, saying, "Hello?" He didn't hear a sound.He started talking to himself, "Lucky me! I've come to have a little drink."
When Turtle had arrived at the well, she had hidden herself among the rocks. She looked just like another rock. As soon as Hare started to go into the water, Turtle grabbed Hare by the leg. Hare said, "Oops, you didn't grab me. You've grabbed a stick!" But Turtle didn't say a word. She stayed there holding onto Hare until the sunrise.
When Lion arrived, he saw that Turtle had captured Hare. He called the rest of the animals to decide what to do with Hare. When all the animals were assembled, Lion asked them, "What shall we do with Hare?"Turtle said, "I want Elephant to grab him with her trunk and beat him on rocks." All the other animals agreed.
Hare quickly said, "O Great Lion, you know that hares don't die if you hit them on rocks. A hare will only die if he is thrown into ashes."So, Lion told Elephant to grab Hare. Elephant picked him up and started hitting him in a pile of ash from a fire.
After Hare was completely covered in ashes, Elephant threw him. As Hare landed he made a big cloud of dust! When the animals saw the dust they really laughed.
When the dust settled, the animals looked around and Hare was gone! And then they knew that Hare had tricked them again.
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means "daughter of the people of Kanyada." She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. "First open my gift," said Odongo. "No, my gift first!" said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar-Kanyada. She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them,  they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, "I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again."
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village.   Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
An apple fell from a tree under which Rabbit was sleeping.
Rabbit heard a voice say, “Run Rabbit run!”
Rabbit told Chicken, “Something fell and I heard, ‘Run Rabbit run!'”
Chicken started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They told Dog, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Dog started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
Dog told Horse, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Horse started to run with the others.
Donkey asked, “Why are you running?” Horse replied, “I don’t know.”
Donkey started running with them.
Donkey told Cow, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Cow was worried and started to run as well.
Cow told Cat, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Cat started running with the other animals.
They met a boy. “Don’t you know what happened?” he asked.
“It was me who said, ‘Run Rabbit run!’” laughed the boy.
Bobabini hebengabangani abakhulu hebehlukene kakhulu.UNonjana hekuthanda ukulala, ukudla engathembeki.Kanti yena uKatana helungile, enokubele futhi engumngani ongamthemba.Yeyonto eyadalukuba batshube kwelokuba bayolalisa kwaNonjana, khonukuze baxele ngohambo lwabo.
Wathi uNonjana, “Mna ndizophatha ukudla kwemini yokuqala.”“Mna ndophatha ukudla kwemini yesibini,” watsho uKatana evuma.Baabhala oko phantsi khonukuze bangaliballi.
“Kuzobamandi kusasa masimbona umngani wethu uNkukhu, kaade samtshubela,” watsho uNonjana ekhapha umnganakhe ejika ebuyela endlinakhe.“Ndiyabonga ngokundikhapha mngan’am,” kutsho uKatana.
Ekuseni baayiqala indlela.Endleleni hebejabule, becula amaculo bedantsa.Baafika emthini bachopha phantsi. “Chaka ndilambile,” watsho uKatana kuNonjana.
UNonjana waakhipha umxhafuxhafu kokudla.Wakhipha izikotile ezimbini waqala ukuchaka ukudla loo nyavunyavu ngokutshetsha.‘’Kukudla kwethu oku?” waabuza uKatana ecunuka ngenyani.Zeyimtshincile into yoba umnganakhe ephule izigqibo. Waaphutsha ke ngoku yilento.
“Ulindeni?” waabuza uNonjana eqalisa esidla.“Kutheni wathwala ukudla kwakho wedwa?”waacunuka watsho uKatana.UNonjana waqhubeka wadla. Esadla kanjalo, nangenxa yokuphanga namafutha ayegcwele isandla sakhe, satshibilika isikotile sawa phantsi.Ukudla konke kwachitheka kowo mhlaba bebehleli kuwo.
“Kulungile ke mnganam,” watsho uKatana.UKatana waakhipha amakhekhe amahle kweyakhe ingxiwa wadla.Ngoyonkxetsha, uNonjana hebheke ukudla kuka Katana ngamehlo arhalayo.Xa uKatana egqibile ukudla wapakisha. “Singaqhubeka nendlela?”
Ukususela ngoko ke beemka bedle imu kolo hambo lonke. Isisu sikaNonjana sasifundekela.Ngobo busuku, uKatana wazichakela ukudla kwakhe walala, egcobile kuba eziphathele ukudla okwaneleyo.UNonjana walala engadlanga.
Ngosuku olulandelayo, uKatana wadla intwana yokudla phambi koba bahambe. UNonjana herhala engakwazi nokuzigola emana ebheka ukudla kukaKatana.UKatana wabuye watshona engxiweni yakhe. “Naku ukudla,” watsho uKatana.“Yhoo, undixolele. Ndenze kabi,” watsho uNonjana.“Masidle,” watsho uKatana.Bachopha phantsi aba bangani badla.
Besotshuba baaqhubeka nohambo baabuye badlala futhi ngathi aange baxabane.Baafika kwamngani wabo liselihle iwatshi.“Nihambe kanjani bangani bam?” watsho uNkukhu.“Sihambe kahle kakhulu,” baaphendula batsho ngankxetsha bencumelene.
Kwaaba ngumgubho omkhulu wokuzalwa.Baacula! Badantsa! Badla!
In a country called Gabon,  a little village stood at the very edge of a forest. In the heart of this forest,  in the highest branches of an enormous tree,  lived a very special bird − the bird that made rain.
For as far back as the villagers could remember,  they had taken the time to keep this bird happy. They saved scraps of bread,  pieces of fruit and fresh coconut milk,  and every week or two a group of villagers took these delicacies into the forest. When they had laid them at the base of the tree,  one of them played a simple tune on the thumb piano.
After a while,  the bird flew down to the ground to eat and drink. When she had finished,  she began to sing the most beautiful song.   At the same time,  she raised her dark,  shiny blue wings,  and within minutes,  the rain began to fall.
This went on for many years. Because the rain fell regularly,  the crops grew abundantly and there was plenty of food in the village.   But gradually things began to change. Somehow,  the villagers were always busy and they began to neglect the rain bird. "It will rain anyway," they said. "It's time to stop spoiling that silly old bird!"
But the people were wrong. When they stopped looking after the bird,  the rain stopped falling. The crops began to dry up and die,  and the animals grew thin and weak. Still,  nobody in the village went into the forest to feed the bird that brought the rain. Now they were all too busy trying to find money to buy food in the neighbouring town.
One scorching day,  a young girl called Ketti decided to go into the forest after school. "At least it will be cool in there," she thought. She walked and walked,  and after some time,  she came to the tall tree in which the rain bird lived. Ketti stared up at the tree. Suddenly,  she remembered how her granny had taken her into the forest to feed the bird when she was still a tiny child. Ketti opened her school bag and pulled out a piece of bread left over from her lunch. Carefully she laid the bread at the base of the tree. Then because she had no thumb piano, she sang an old song that she had known all her life.
With a loud whooshing sound,  a beautiful blue bird swooped out of the branches above Ketti's head and began to eat the bread. When the bird had finished,  she opened her mouth and sang a few pure,  high notes. Then she raised her shiny wings and all of a sudden Ketti heard the rumble of thunder. By the time she reached her home,  giant rain drops were pelting down,  cooling the baking red earth.
Ketti was very happy,  until she told her parents what had happened. "Don't be silly!" scolded her mother. "Nobody believes that bird has anything to do with the rain anymore!" "Your mother is right," said Ketti's father. "The drought has been broken now and we will be fine. Don't go wasting good bread feeding that greedy old bird again!"   Though Ketti didn't argue with her parents,  she felt sure they were wrong. "If only Granny were still alive," she said to herself,  "she would have believed me!" But Ketti's granny had died a few years earlier. The only thing Ketti had left,  was her granny's old thumb piano.
Two weeks passed and there was no more rain. The crops began to shrivel up again and the hungry animals' ribs began to stick out even more. The sun beat down mercilessly from a glaring blue sky.   "I don't care what they say!" thought Ketti. "We need rain. I'm going to feed the bird again tomorrow!"
So,  early the next morning,  after taking a slice of bread and a handful of red berries from the kitchen,  Ketti slipped out of the house. She began to make her way to the centre of the forest.   What she didn't realise,  was that her father was also awake. When he saw what his daughter was doing,  he realised that she was going to feed the rain bird again.
"I'll teach that  child a lesson!" he said to himself angrily. He snatched his bow and arrows and silently followed Ketti into the forest. Just as the bird flew down to eat the food that Ketti had set out for it,  her father raised his bow and released his deadly arrow. The arrow flew straight into the bird's heart. The bird let out a piercing shriek. Terrified,  Ketti spun around − just in time to see her father fall down,  stone dead. Ketti screamed and turned around − just in time to see the arrow fall harmlessly from the bird's glossy body. Then the bird,  unharmed, swooped up into the highest branch of the tree.
Ketti raced out of the forest to a scene of utter devastation. Every animal and every person she saw lay dead on the ground. With a pounding heart,  she ran all the way back to her home.  She quickly found her granny's old thumb piano. "This is my only hope!" she thought. "The rain bird is angry. I have to make her happy again! I HAVE to!"
Half an hour later,  Ketti was back at the base of the big tree. Her body was drenched with sweat and she was gasping for breath. A few paces away from her lay the lifeless body of her father. Ketti looked away quickly,  and with trembling hands,  began to play the thumb piano. She played and played,  until her fingers hurt.
Finally,  what she wanted most in the world happened. Down swooped the bird as if nothing had happened. The bird ate some of the berries still lying on the ground and sang a few notes. Then,  as Ketti played on,  the bird raised her wings. Ketti heard a rustle behind her.
It was her father who had woken up! "I'm sorry!" he said again and again to the big, blue bird. Then he held out his hand to his daughter and they walked slowly back to the village. In the village all the people and animals were alive again.
That night the villagers held a meeting.They all agreed that they had learned a valuable lesson. And from that day onwards,  not one week passed without a special trip to the forest to feed the bird that brought the rain.
Monkey lived in a big tree on the bank of a river. In the middle of the river there was a small island. Lots of fruit trees grew on that island.
Monkey wanted to go and eat the fruit. He saw a big rock half way across the river and he thought he could jump onto the rock,  and then onto the island.
He jumped into the air and landed on the rock. He jumped again and reached the island. He enjoyed eating the fruit and then went back home. He did this several times.
But Crocodile lived in the river with his wife! The wife said,  "Dear husband,  you should go and lie on the rock. The colour of your skin matches the colour of the rock."
A few days later,  Crocodile saw Monkey coming onto the island. He quietly climbed over the rock and carefully lay down on it and kept his face underwater.
Monkey finished eating and was ready to go back. But the rock looked higher than usual,  so he spoke to the rock,  "Dear rock,  you seem to have grown. Are you all right?"
Crocodile was a fool and thought the rock must be a talking rock. So he answered Monkey and said,  "I look bigger because a big crocodile is lying on me."
Monkey said,  "Dear Crocodile,  I know you want to eat me. I am very old and you can have my body. But I must say goodbye to my children in that big tree." So Crocodile gave him a ride on his back!
As soon as they were there,  Monkey climbed the tree and said,  "Thank you for the ride,  my dear friend. Goodbye,  now you can go home!" But Crocodile said,  "But you promised."
Monkey laughed and said,  "What a fool you were to believe me!" and disappeared behind the branches of the tree. Crocodile never did catch clever Monkey!
DeviAgain! Again!I want to knock it down again!Bonda does it. He makes a box tower.He does a good job.He does not smile.He does not frown.
DeviVroom! Vroom!BAM!And she knocks it down again!!!Bonda laughsand claps.He does this every time.Bonda is my best friend.A perfect friend for a girl in a wheelchair!
DeviHi! I'm Devi. I'm from the future! The year 2085.So much has changed since your time.Today, technology makes life wonderful!
DeviMeet Bonda. My best friend. A ROBOT.Did you guess that? Who else would build a tower 50 times?Bonda never gets bored!
DeviBonda can do many things.He can get my secret box from the top shelf.He can lift Baba's desk to find my earring.Things like that.
BondaHumans are useless!Your legs and arms cannot grow taller.My arms have cameras and telescopes!
DeviI have to train Bonda.I "program" him.I show him how to do things.Like on Sunday, I wanted my box.First, I sent Bonda to the shelf. Bonda's screen has a map of my house. I drew the path to the shelf with my finger on the map.Next, I told him to reach up and scan the top shelf.His camera finger took pictures.
DeviBonda showed me the pictures he took.I touched the picture of the box I wanted."That is my secret box, Bonda," I said.Can you bring it to me?Now, I only have to say, "Secret box!" And off he goes.Once Bonda learns, he never forgets. Not like humans!
DeviSo, that is my best friend.I have human friends too.We play and fight and go to school.But I love Bonda best. He never gets mad at me!
DeviRobots do not have feelings.But, shhh! Don't tell Bonda I said that!It might make him feel bad!BondaThat is not logical, Devi!If I do not have feelings, how can I feel bad?Silly humans. Pah!
DeviThe best part is, I have Bonda all to myself! I never get jealous. Because I am his only friend!BondaThat is not true. I have other robot friends! Wait! Does Devi only like me BECAUSE she thinks I have no friends? And no feelings? Oh no! I feel mad, and sad, and...
DeviBonda, are you okay? You are getting hot! You are not working!I will take care of you now. I will shut you down. It will be like going to sleep. Then I will start you again.BondaDevi's eyes are wet. She is sad. I feel sad. But, wet eyes mean she cares about me.So I also feel happy! I feel happy-sad.
Whirr! Hum! Bonda reboots.DeviBonda? Bonda, do you hear me?Is your memory gone? I want you to remember our fun! Our love...
BondaAha! Love. That sad-happy feeling is love!
BondaHi, Devi!What can I do?Do you want me to stack the boxes?Do you want me to get your secret box?DeviOh, Bonda!You're all right!I am so glad!
BondaI do something very odd.No one programmed me to do it.I wrap my arms around my friend, Devi.This is not logical!
Who or what is a robot?A robot is “any electro-mechanical machine guided by a computer program or electronic circuits." It doesn't have to look like a human. There are robots all around us, already!Really? Where?Well, they are in factories, warehouses, orchards, hospitals and even homes. They may look like large mechanical arms.Car factories use these for welding, gluing and painting car parts. Or they may look like tiny cameras, attached to thin hair-like tubes,.Hospitals use these to entering our intestines and arteries to check them out. Some robots look like flat round discs, buzzing around.Homes and offices use these to clean floors at night when everyone is asleep. Some look like small wheeled vehicles, going into war zones.Soldiers use these to find dangerous landmines.Other robots roll across the surfaces of the moon or Mars.They take pictures and sendsamples to send to scientists back on Earth.Will there be a Bonda for every Devi by the year 2085? We'll have to wait and see!
Have you ever seen a robot?If you have ever used, or even seen, a computer or a smartphone, you have 'seen' a robot!Yes, they are in those devices as well. Some of them even have names, like Siri and Cortana.They can help us find useful information for school projects, traffic reports and more. They can book our bus and train tickets, and order our groceries.They can even tell us exactly how many calories we have burnt after a game of football!What does the future of robots look like? We may not have robots walking our streets in India by 2040.But we will definitely be surrounded by robots of one kind or another without knowing it. It is quite likely that there will be driverless “robot” cars on our streets. We may have microscopic robots in our contact lenses that help us take pictures.We won't even have to hold our phones or cameras up to take them.But how will we take selfies?? And little airborne robots called drones will be flying all around.They will deliver letters, packages and kababs, putting delivery boys out of business!As for 2085, 45 years AFTER that, who knows what robots will be up to?
Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.
The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.
Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find theright man.
Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. This herb would healher father's wound. Butthe lake was filled with dangerous spirits.
Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. Some men did not return from the lake at all.
Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" But Nangila had made up her mind.
On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."
When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.
Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived intothe lake. She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.
When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She was afraid, but she sang the song the old woman taught her, "I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here, in the land where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers."
Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.
Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. The entire village danced and praised Nangila.
“Matshelo ndi holodei ya lushaka, a thi khou ya tshikoloni,” ndi Mulweli a tshi amba na khotsi awe.“Na nṋe a thi shumi matshelo,” ndi khotsi vhane vha khou ralo.“Baba, ndi mini zwine vha zwi ita nga Duvha ḽa Vhashumi?”
“Zwo luga ṅwananga, kha ri ndi mu vhudze nga ha Ḓuvha ḽa Vhashumi ḽa Mashangooṱhe,” ndi khotsi vha tshi fhindula.“Mafhungo o thoma musi vhashumi vha tshi lwela uri vha shume awara dza malo nga ḓuvha. Vho vha vha sa ṱoḓi u shuma awara dzi fhiraho malo nga ḓuvha.”
“Vho vha vha tshi shuma awara nngana?” hu vhudzisa Mulweli.“Vho vha vha tshi anzela u shuma awara dza fumi kana dza fuminthihi nga ḓuvha,” ndi khotsi vha tshi fhindula“Nga ḽa 1 May 1886, vhashumi vha ngei Amerika vho ṱereka uri awara dzi fhungudzwe dzi vhe malo.”
Muṅwe muthu o mbo ḓi posa bomo kha mapholisa musi hu tshi khou ṱerekiwa.“Nga murahu ha itea mini?” ndi Mulweli a tshi vhudzisa.“Vhashumi vhaṋa vho farwa nge vha posa yeneyo bomo. Vho mbo ḓi vhonwa mulandu nahone vha vhulawa,” ndi khotsi vha tshi fhindula nga u ongolowa.
“Vhashumi u mona na shango ḽoṱhe, vho ṱerekela u vhulawa ha vhenevho vhashumi vhaṋa. Vhashumi vho mbo ḓi tikedzana nga vhuthihi.U bva zwezwo, ḓuvha ḽa 1 May ḽo mbo ḓi vha ḽa u lwela ha vhashumi zwiimo zwa khwine zwa u shuma,” ndi khotsi vha tshi anetshela.
“Vhaṅwe vha vhidza ḽeneḽi ḓuvha uri ndi ‘May Day’. Ḓuvha ḽa u thoma ḽa May ḽo mbo ḓi dzhiiwa sa ḓuvha ḽa u lwela pfanelo dza vhashumi na ḽa uri hu vhe na vhuthihi kha vhashumi vhoṱhe. Ndi holodei ya lushaka mashangoni manzhi,” ndi khotsi vha tshi khou ṱalutshedza.
“Nga Ḓuvha ḽa Vhashumi ngeno Afrika Tshipembe, ri ṱanganela na vhashumi vha dzimilioni u mona na shango ḽoṱhe kha u pembelela ḽeneḽi ḓuvha. Hu a dzudzanywa dziraḽi na mimatsho.”“Naa yo ḓi dzula i holodei ngeno Afrika Tshipembe u bva nga 1886?” ndi Mulweli a tshi vhudzisa.
“Na luthihi!” ndi khotsi vha tshi khou sea. “Muvhuso wa tshiṱalula wo vha u sa ṱoḓi ri tshi pembelela ḓuvha ḽa u thoma ḽa May.Fhedzi madzangano a vhashumi o vhudza muvhuso a ri: ‘May Day ndi yashu. Ḓuvha ḽa 1 May ndi ḽashu!’”
“U ṱereka ha vhashumi zwo thusa kha u fhelisa tshiṱalula. Ri tshi shumisa madzangano ashu a vhashumi, ro tamba tshipiḓa tsha ndeme kha u lwela pfanelo dza demokirasi,” ndi khotsi vhane vha khou amba.Khotsi vha a vhudzisa, “Ni nga humbulela uri dzi 1 May dzo vha lini holodei fhano?”
“Eee, zwi nga vha zwo itea nga murahu ha tshiṱalula. Musi Afrika Tshipembe ḽo no wana demokirasi,” ndi Mulweli a tshi fhindula.Khotsi awe vha tenda nga ṱhoho, “Ndi ngoho. Naho ro i wana demokirasi, vhashumi vhanzhi vha kha ḓi lwela zwiimo zwa khwine zwa u shuma na muholo.”
“Zwa zwino mafhungo anga nga ha ḓivhazwakale a guma henefha. Ndi khou ṱoḓa u ḓilugisela ḽa matshelo. Dzangano ḽanga ḽa vhashumi ḽo lugisela raḽi khulu hune ha ḓo vha hu na zwiambi zwa poḽitiki,” ndi khotsi vhane vha khou amba.“Na ene u tea u fhedzisa tshuṅwahaya yawe ṋamusi.”
“Ho luga Baba. Zwino ndi a pfesesa uri ndi ngani ḓuvha ḽa u thoma ḽa May ḽi ḽa ndeme kha vhone na vhaṅwe vhashumi. Zwa zwino mushumo une nda vha nawo ndi wa tshikolo,” ndi Mulweli a tshi khou setshelela.
This is my teacher.Her name is Teacher Akinyi.She loves us a lot.
Teacher Akinyi teaches us the alphabet. She teaches us the vowels. I can say the letters a,  e,  i,  o,  u.
Teacher Akinyi teaches us colours. I know red,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and black.
During nap time,  Teacher Akinyi sings us to sleep. She sings a lullaby to us.
On Monday,  she tells us stories about great men.
On Tuesday,  she tells us stories about great women.
On Wednesday,  she tells us stories about means of transport.
On Thursday,  she tells us stories about farming.
And on Friday,  we tell our own stories to the class.
Our teacher is the best teacher in the world! When I grow up,  I want to be like Teacher Akinyi.
Eyes
Ears
Mouth
Nose
Chin
Teeth
Tongue
Cheeks
Eyebrows
Hair
Cracked brown wood.
Painted brown lion.
Soft brown bread.
Yummy brown cakes.
Old brown boots.
Shiny brown buffalo.
Woolly brown hat.
Smooth brown dog.
Dirty brown mud.
Wet brown skin.
And what is this? A clean face in a dirty mirror.
When we go walking and the road is long, we’ll walk together singing a song.
I am with you and you are with me. A journey is fun with our family.
I’ll keep you cosy like a mother hen. She keeps her chicks warm under her wing.
If the rain starts to fall down from the sky, like that good hat I’ll keep your face dry.
If storm clouds get angry and grumble and moan, be brave, why cry? You’re not alone.
We’re walking together so we never get bored. Look up! Look around! See where we’ve explored!
If you see something that’s funny to see, I don’t want to miss it. Please share it with me!
If your feet start to hurt from the distance we’ve passed, don’t worry, we’ve made it! Here’s the clinic at last.
We all need to check our throat, lungs and ears. Get strong as you grow, it’s no reason for tears.
Do you think it’s scary? Here, hold my hand. She’ll check your blood pressure with this clever armband.
They give us our medicine, tell us what we should know, to keep us all healthy. Now back home we go.
It’s okay to be tired, there’s so much we’ve seen. Now it’s your bedtime. Sleep well and sweet dreams.
I'm Maria.
This is my mother.
This is the baby.
This is my father.
This is my brother.
This is my sister.
This is my grandmother.
This is my grandfather.
This is my uncle.
This is my aunt.
This is my family.
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
When I talk to her, she also talks to me.
In the morning, my friend will go back into the mirror.
But I don't mind at all. We will play again in my dreams!
Yellow butterfly on the sand.
Yellow plastic drum in the house.
Yellow horse in the street.
Yellow truck in the city.
Yellow bowl on the ground.
Yellow flowers in a bucket.
Yellow trolley in the lane.
Yellow slide in the park.
Yellow house on the corner.
Yellow Africa on my head.
And where do we all live? In Africa.
I can swim with it.
I can dance with it.
I can swing with it.
I can get eats using my body.
I can skip with it.
I can bath my doll with it.
I can make mats with it.
I can move with it but i can not fly with it.
Tamara was a five-year-old girl who lived with her family. Their village was near a forest that had wild animals.
Tamara was obedient to her parents. She looked after sheep and goats.
Tamara loved listening to birds singing as she took care of the animals. As the birds sang, she put her own words to the tune.
Tamara was too young for school. Her parents only allowed their older children, Nashipae and Tasieku, to go to school. It was 10 kilometres away.
Nashipae and Tasieku went with other children from the village in the morning and returned in the evening. They carried food in small containers.
Tamara asked her mother, "When will I go to school?" Her mother answered, "You will go soon, my dear child."
One day, a car arrived with the chief and two ladies. The chief made sure that children went to school at the right age.
People believed that if a child was able to stretch her hand over her head and touch the ear, she was ready to start school.
The chief asked, "How old are you?" Tamara replied, "I am five years old." "Let's see if you can go to school," the chief said.
One of the ladies took Tamara's right arm and gently placed it over her head. Tamara touched her left ear.
Tamara would go to a different school than Nashipae and Tasieku. It was new and closer to home.
Tamara was very happy. She thought, "I will read and write like Nashipae and Tasieku."
A long time ago,  three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly,  they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home,  Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But,  she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise,  a dog opened the door and said,  "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said,  "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said,  "Make the bed for me!" Nozibele answered,  "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed,  or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said,  "Nozibele,  today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house,  cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone,  Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed,  one behind the door,  and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back,  he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele,  where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here,  under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here,  behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here,  in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
How many cats? 0 Zero cats. No cats.
How many cats? 1 One cat. One black cat. A black cat can eat red meat.
How many cats? 2 Two cats. White and grey cats. White and grey cats play in flowers.
How many cats? 3 Three cats. Grey, creme and spotted cats. They play up and down on walls.
How many cats? 4 Four cats. Four cats are good friends of Paul.
How many cats? 5 Five cats. Five cats play around the sitting room.
How many cats? 6 Six cats. Six cats can sit together and watch the film.
How many cats? 7 Seven cats. Seven cats play around the compound.
How many cats 8 Eight cats. Eight cats do not want the dog.
What's this we see? A kitten is stuck in a tree! "I will rescue you!" Paul said.
"Mama,  can we keep him? Just one more." How many cats? 9 Nine cats are too much. Mama said.
Once upon a time, there was a boy who was so ugly that nobody loved him. Not even his parents. At home,  he would sit alone while his family watched television.
At school, he would sit alone while other children were playing.
He would walk alone behind the other boys when they went to fetch the cattle. They didn't want to walk with him.
One day he decided to leave home. He walked until he got to an indigenous forest. He started to feel scared, but was comforted by the thought that nobody would speak to him. Because nobody loved him.
He was about to enter the forest when an old, dirty,  ugly woman came up to him. She greeted him and asked why he was going into the scary forest. The boy was shocked to hear someone speaking to him. He told the old woman that he wasn't going anywhere. Because no one loved him.
The old woman asked if he needed help. He quickly said, "Yes." The old woman said that before she helped him, she wanted him to lick her face until she was clean and beautiful.
The boy didn't have any other choice in order to get the help he needed. He licked the sleep from her eyes,  the snot from her nose, and the wax from her ears. He licked her face until she was clean and beautiful.
The old woman thanked him. She said, "You will find many wonderful things in the forest, but don't take any of these things. Only bring back the root that you find."
The boy ran, wanting to see all of the things in the forest. Before he could enter the forest, the old woman called him. She said, "Boy! Come back here!" He ran back to her. She repeated, "Don't take any of the wonderful things in the forest. Only bring back the root that you find." The boy nodded and ran off.
Before he could enter the forest, he heard a voice saying, "Boy! Come back here!" He started to feel confused about what the old woman wanted. He ran back to her again. She said, "You will find many wonderful things in the forest. But only bring back the root that you find." The boy nodded and ran off.
Just after he had entered the forest, he heard a voice saying, "Boy! Come back here!" He again went back to the old woman. She said, "Listen to me. Only bring back the root that you find. Don't take anything else from the forest." The boy was annoyed with the repetition. He ran into the forest.
Once he was in the forest, he saw a bowl filled with money. He took the money and put it in his pocket. All of a sudden, he thought about what the old woman said. He took the money out of his pocket and put it back in the bowl.
He continued walking. He saw some splendid new clothes. He took off his clothes and put on the new ones. Then he thought about what the old woman had said. He took off the new clothes and put his old ones back on.
Next he saw the root. It was withered from the sun. He asked himself what the old woman thought he would do with the root. Next to the root, there was a bowl of food. The food smelled delicious and the boy was hungry. He couldn't stop himself from eating.
When he had finished,  he remembered what the old woman had told him. The old woman had said he must only take the root. He looked around for the root, but he couldn't see it anymore.
The boy left the forest feeling disappointed. He went back to tell the old woman what had happened. But the old woman was gone.
Once upon a time, Sly Jackal woke up early in the morning. He was very hungry. His tummy gave a big growl. GRRrrrrr! He jumped up and went searching for food.
He wandered around the forest for hours without getting any food. The sun was very hot. Sly Jackal could barely see in front of him. All he could think of was his hunger pangs.
"Aaauuuu!" Sly Jackal let out a loud scream. He fell into a well right in front of him. He was so hungry that he did not spot it.
"Oh my hat!" he thought. "I have to get out of this well. I will die of hunger."
Sly Jackal screamed and shouted, "Help! Anyone help!" Donkey was grazing a few metres away from the well. Donkey heard Sly Jackal's desperate cry. He came rushing.
"What is the matter?" Donkey was very worried. "The water in this well is cool and sweet. I am bored swimming alone. I need someone to help me swim. Please will you join me?"
"The sun is very hot," said Donkey. "I can't swim very well though." "Jump in! I will help you come out of the well," promised the Sly Jackal.
Donkey jumped into the well. The water was so cool. He was free from the heat. Before he knew it, the jackal had jumped on his back and out of the well. Sly Jackal laughed and ran away. Donkey was trapped in the well. He started screaming and shouting, "Help! Anyone help!"
﻿I lost my bat.    I cant find it anywhere.
I searched behind the door.    It's not there.
I checked on the shelf.   couldn't find it there.
﻿Searched under the cot.    It's not there either.
﻿checked in the box.     There is no trace of it.
Searched the whole loft.     couldn't find it there too.
﻿I searched for it everywhere.     couldn't find it anywhere.      There, It's in my sister's hand.
Once upon a time,  Rabbit and Monkey were friends. One day,  in a time of famine,  Rabbit invited Monkey over to play.
Rabbit said,  "Let's play cooking each other!" Monkey asked,  "How can we do that?"
Rabbit answered,  "First,  we have to make a fire."
Rabbit continued,  "We fill a pot with water,  and then put it on the fire."
"I will get in first. When I beat on the lid of the pot,  you open it. Then I will get out." Rabbit explained. Monkey agreed.
So,  Rabbit got in the pot first.
When the water started to warm up,  Rabbit knocked,  and Monkey opened the lid.
When it was Monkey's turn,  Rabbit put a big stone on the lid of the pot and sat on top of it as well!
When the water started to boil,  Monkey knocked,  but Rabbit didn't open the lid.
Monkey died,  and Rabbit ate his best friend!
Vhathu vhoṱhe vha ḽifhasi vha na vhubvo havho. Vhubvo hashu ndi vhufa hashu.Vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe vha pembela vhubvo havho nga u kuvhangana nga ḓuvha iḽi sa miṱa, mashaka, zwitshavha, kana sa lushaka.Afrika Tshipembe ḽi na sialala dzo fhambanaho.
Roṱhe Afrika Tshipembe ri na vhufa hune ra ḓikhoḓa ngaho!Afrika Tshipembe ḽi na vhufa ha manakanaka.Kha mvelele dzo fhambanaho hu na tshaka dzo fhambanaho dza zwiḽiwa, zwiambaro, zwinwiwa na nyimbo na mitshino.
Kha sialala dzo fhambanaho hu na vhurereli, vhuṱambo na mitupo.Vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe vha amba nyambo dzo fhambanaho. Shango ḽa Afrika Tshipembe ḽi na nyambo dza 11 dza tshiofisi.
Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa nga Nyambo dza Tshiofisi dza Afrika Tshipembe:Ilanga lamaGugu (isiNdebele)Usuku lwaMafa (isiXhosa)Usuku lwamagugu (isiZulu)Letšatši la Bohwa (Sepedi)Letsatsi la Botjhaba (Sesotho)Letsatsi la Ngwaoboswa (Setswana)Lilanga Lemagugu (Siswati)Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa (Tshivenḓa)Siku ra Ndzhaka (Xitsonga)Erfenisdag (Afrikaans)Heritage Day (English)
Nga tshifhinga tsha muvhuso wa tshiṱalula (apartheid), ḽa 24 Khubvumedziḽo vha ḽi tshi pfi Shaka Day.Musi muvhuso wa tshiṱalula wo no fa, phaḽamennde yo shandula Ḓuvha ḽa Shaka ḽa vha Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa. Vho ḽi ita ḓuvha ḽa u pembela ha vhathu vhoṱhe vha Afrika Tshipembe.Ri pembelela u sa fana hashu sa tshaka nnzhi na vhufa hashu hu no fana.
Ndayotewa ya Afrika Tshipembe i na milayo i no ri dededza. I na milayo i no ṱuṱuwedza na u tsireledza zwa vhufa hashu roṱhe.Ndayotewa i ri roṱhe ri a lingana.A hu na a no fhira muṅwe!
Vhathu vha songo itelana tshiṱalula.Ri tea u farana nga u lingana.Muthu muṅwe na muṅwe u na pfanelo dzi no lingana. Roṱhe ri na pfanelo dza nyambo, vhurereli, na sialala.
Nga Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa, vhunzhi ha vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe vha a imba nyimbo dzavho dza sialala na mitshino.Ri dovha hafhu ra ḓiphiṋa nga u bika zwiḽiwa zwa sialala.Vhaṅwe vha elelwa vhomakhulukuku vhavho nga zwirendo. Vhaṅwe vha tshi ya u phasa zwaloni zwavho.
Hu ambariwa zwiambaro zwa mivhala yo fhambanaho da miṅwenda, tshishwetshwe, zwibeḽana na zwiṅwe zwinzhi.Musi ri tshi pembelela Ḓuvha Ḽa Vhufa sa vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe, ri pembelela na zwiga zwa lushaka.Zwiga zwa lushaka ndi zwipuka na zwimela zwine zwa vha tshipiḓa tsha vhufa hashu.
Zwiga izwi zwa Afrika Tshipembe ndi:Tsepe i re tshiga tsha tshipuka tsha lushaka.Musilisili ndi tshiṋoni tsha lushaka. Muhovhohovho ndi muri wa lushaka.Phurothia ndi dzuvha ḽa lushaka.Galjoen ndi khovhe ya lushaka.
Zwikolo zwi a fara vhuṱambo ha u pembelela Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa musi iḽi ḓuvha ḽi tshee kule.Vhana vha ambara zwiambaro zwa sialala vha vhudza vhaṅwe afha kiḽasini zwine vha ḓivha nga sialala ya havho.Vha thetshedzana zwiḽiwa zwa sialala dzo fhambanaho, na u tshina mitshino ya sialala dzo fhambanaho.
Zwa Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa zwi tea u pembelelwa hoṱhe Afrika! Avha vhanaVhana vha Afrika vha no ḓihudza nga vhufa vha ri:Ndi pfi Namunya. Ndo ambara shuka.Ndi pfi Adilah. Ndo ambara kaftan.Ndi pfi Isoka. Ndo ambara gele.Ndi pfi Sipho. Ndo ambara bheshu.
One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi’s cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”Her stomach growled when the baby’s powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life.
One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter.What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.
Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong.Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed.She taught them to sing: “Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers.He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, “You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back.”Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi’s broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers.How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father’s face.
On her sixth birthday she went to school. “You must choose an English name,” said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. “Why do I need a new name?” she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: “Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna.” What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn’t mess with.When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, “You have a big job, my blessing.”At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.
Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride.Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, “You must apply, my clever friend.” “What is the prize?” asked Albertina, growing curious.“A scholarship to high school!” said Betty. “You must apply. You’ll win it, for sure.”
Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.The test began. Albertina’s fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. “Well done, Albertina!” said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. “Well done to Albertina for full marks,” he said, “but you are too old. The scholarship goes to…”Albertina tried not to cry. “That’s unfair,” shouted Betty, hopping with fury. “That wasn’t in the rules!” How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home.The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn’t like the story one bit either.
Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached.She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse’s silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground.
School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty’s back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons.In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? “But nuns earn no salary,” said Father Bernard. “Perhaps you should become a nurse? You’ll be paid while you study.”
Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse.Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.
Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina’s eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children.Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men’s Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina’s long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation.Max had his mother’s black button eyes and his father’s round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. “How rude you are!” she said, “trampling mud inside my home.”In the morning Albertina’s favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover.She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police.
She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, “Wathint’ abafazi; wathint’ imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!”Many hard years followed after Walter’s arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. "Ants don't read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need."
Little Ant would read all day, he'd read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down, the ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. "A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read."
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said, "Hey,  there's one!"
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger,  carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand, "Now I think I understand. The way you love to read a book makes me want to take a look."
This is a fat king.
The fat king has a thin dog.The fat king and his thin dog go for a walk.
The dog sees a bird.The dog runs after the bird.
The king runs after the dog.
They run and run.They run and run for many days.
The king catches the dog.
Now the fat king is thin.
Now the fat king is thin.
Once upon a time, all the animals lived together in the bush. The rooster was their chief.
Rooster told the animals that the comb on his head was made of fire. For this reason all the animals feared Rooster.
In those days, fire was made using a bow drill. One rainy day, Leopard's bow drill got wet. She could not make a fire to warm her family.
So Leopard sent her cubs to ask Rooster for fire from his comb.
Rooster was in a bad mood. He sent the cubs away without any fire. Leopard was upset when the cubs came back with nothing.
Late that night when Rooster was asleep, Leopard and her cubs went to steal the fire from Rooster's comb. Leopard picked some dry grass outside Rooster's house.
She put the dry grass next to the comb on the sleeping Rooster's head. But the grass did not catch fire. She carefully touched the comb. It was cold!
The cubs also touched the comb. There was no fire! The leopard family all started laughing.
The leopards' laughter woke Rooster and the chickens. Rooster turned his comb towards them, shouting, "You should run away. Aren't you afraid?"
Leopard replied, "We touched your comb and we know about your trick! We'll go back and tell the other animals. They will be angry with you."
The chickens were afraid. They ran away and Rooster ran with them. The chickens left the bush and went to live with people.
Since that time, chickens have feared leopards and lived with people for protection.
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means “daughter of the people of Kanyada.” She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. “First open my gift,” said Odongo. “No, my gift first!” said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar­Kanyada.She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them, they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, “I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again.”
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village. Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
Sara has a canoe. Her canoe is big. It is by the riverside.
Some women come to the river. One woman has a basin of fruit. Another woman has a chicken. Another woman has a goat. Another woman has two goats. They ask Sara, "How can we get to the other side of the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!"
Then, some men arrive. One man has a fish. Another man has a bicycle. Another man has a sack of maize.
Another man has two sacks of maize. They ask Sara, "How can we get to the other side of the river?" Sara replies, "Get in my canoe!"
Some animals come to the river. They ask Sara, "How can we get across the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!"
The animals get in the canoe. The dog gets in the canoe. The cat gets in the canoe. The monkey gets in the canoe. The rabbit gets in the canoe. The turtle gets in the canoe. The gazelle gets in the canoe.
The elephant arrives at the river. He asks, "How can I get to the other side of the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!" The elephant gets in the canoe. The canoe fills up with water.
The canoe is too small. There isn't enough room.
Sara says, "Hold on! First I'll take the women."
Sara says, "Second, I'll take the men."
Sara says, "Finally, I'll take the animals."
The elephant says, "I'm just going to walk!"
It is one week until Thato’s birthday. That’s seven whole days!
His mama says: “Your birthday present will be a BIG surprise!” Thato wonders: what will it be?
On Monday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get giant wings so I can fly high in the sky like a bird…”
On Tuesday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will have a birthday cake as big as a house!”
On Wednesday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get a rocket ship to whizz up to the moon.”
On Thursday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get fins so I can swim under the water like a fish.”
On Friday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get magic soccer boots and score a thousand goals!”
On Saturday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get a key that opens a box filled with treasure!”
On Sunday it is Thato’s birthday. Mama smiles and says: “Come and see your surprise!”
It is the best present ever. Thato’s big brother Kudzai has come to visit all the way from the big city!
Thato smiles and smiles and his big brother lifts him up in the air and hugs him.Kudzai asks: “What do you want to do for your birthday, little brother?”
And Thato knows exactly what they will do the whole day long.
Once upon a time, the animals decided to have a party. But it was not for all of them. It was only for the animals that had horns.
The rabbit was getting ready for the party. But then he found out that the party was not for everyone. It was just for animals  with horns.
The rabbit went somewhere and got some horns. Then he put them on his head and went to the party.
During the party the rabbit ate and drank and danced.
This made him tired and he fell down in the sun. But while the rabbit was sleeping, the horns fell off!
Then all the animals discovered that the rabbit was not the kind of animal they wanted. So they pulled his ears till they got bigger and bigger.
Then they ran away. And that's the reason why rabbits have big ears!
When we go walking and the road is long, we'll walk together singing a song.
I am with you and you are with me. A journey is fun with our family.
I'll keep you cosy like a mother hen. She keeps her chicks warm under her wing.
If the rain starts to fall down from the sky, like that good hat I'll keep your face dry.
If storm clouds get angry and grumble and moan, be brave, why cry? You're not alone.
We're walking together so we never get bored. Look up! Look around! See where we've explored!
If you see something that's funny to see, I don't want to miss it. Please share it with me!
If your feet start to hurt from the distance we've passed, don't worry, we've made it! Here's the clinic at last.
We all need to check our throat, lungs and ears. Get strong as you grow, it's no reason for tears.
Do you think it's scary? Here, hold my hand. She'll check your blood pressure with this clever armband.
They give us our medicine, tell us what we should know, to keep us all healthy. Now back home we go.
It's okay to be tired, there's so much we've seen. Now it's your bedtime. Sleep well and sweet dreams.
The Winter cold had passed. Spring was coming to Nkanyezi's village. Soon the villagers would gather to celebrate the new season. Nkanyezi looked forward to the Spring festival more than any other day in the year.
One warm morning, Nkanyezi overheard two village elders talking about the festival. "The people of Ndlovu have lost their spirit of celebration," one sighed. "How can we have a Spring festival in a village that has forgotten how to celebrate?" asked another.
Nkanyezi was worried. "How will the sun shine again unless we sing to wake it from its winter slumber?" she asked herself. Nkanyezi thought for a long time. "I must find what we have lost," she decided. "I must go in search of things that will bring back the spirit of celebration to my village."
The elders gave Nkanyezi their blessing for the journey. They gave her a bag to carry the things she would find. Nkanyezi was afraid, but she believed she would succeed.
Nkanyezi walked all day. She hiked up a hill, and down into a valley. She sailed across the great river, and climbed between sharp rocks. She marched across the plains until she reached the shadow of the red mountains.
As night was closing in, Nkanyezi arrived at a village of patterns and colours as she had never seen before. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.The mother of this tribe gave Nkanyezi a gift. She told the girl, "With love we give to you this paint to restore colour to your village." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the paint in her bag. Early the next morning she went on her way.
Nkanyezi walked all day, through a vast forest of giant trees. As the sky became too dark for her to see, she heard the sound of beating drums. She hurried towards the drumming, feeling the spirit of dance coming to her tired feet.
Nkanyezi found herself in the village of the Bhubezi. People were sitting around a fire, drumming and singing. She had never before heard such wonderful music. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The Bhubezi invited her to rest and stay the night.
In the morning the chief called on Nkanyezi. "My child," he said, "here is a special drum. It plays a new song every time you beat it." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the drum in her bag. She went on her way again, delighted with this gift of music and dance.
On the third day of her journey, as she passed a field of fat cows, her nose started to tingle. An aroma tickled her taste buds and her mouth started to water. She followed the scent, and arrived in a village to find people standing over steaming pots of stew. This tribe was famous for its feasts and Nkanyezi had never before tasted such flavours. After she had eaten her fill, she told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.
The next day, the council of cooks gave her a secret spice blend. "Our daughter," they said, "with these spices, happy tummies are guaranteed! We give you the gift of good food." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the spices in her bag. She knew she had everything she needed. With new energy she started the long journey back to the village of Ndlovu.
When she arrived home the villagers gathered around her to hear of her adventures. She told them the tales of what she had seen, heard, and eaten. Then she opened her bag to share the gifts given. The villagers rejoiced to receive these treasures. The generosity of others and the courage of Nkanyezi brought back colour, song and dance to the people.  And so the spirit of celebration was restored to the village of Ndlovu.
All of us went to the fun fair.
Father bought brother fancy glasses. Mother bought me a bright blue cap. The baby got sugar candy.
On the way home,  a very strong wind came. It blew my cap away.
My cap got stuck on a branch of a big old tree.
I cried a lot. And I did not eat my dinner.
Later that night,  the moon came up. It looked at my cap in the big old tree.
The moon tried on my cap. It smiled happily. I had to smile too.
After school the next day,  my mother gave me a shiny new red cap. "The moon sent it," she said.
That night,  both the moon and I wore our caps and smiled. We were happy.
Do you think the sun needs a hat?
Guess which cap I am wearing today!
Once upon a time, there lived a man who had plenty of everything – a large fertile farm, with cattle, sheep, and goats. But, as he grew old, he grew sad, because one thing was missing. He did not have a wife.
Standing under a tree one day, he had a brilliant idea.If he couldn't find a wife, perhaps he could make one?
So he set to work to shape a beautiful woman from a strong branch of the tree. When he had finished making the statue, he touched her eyes, and they opened. He blew gently on her, and she came alive.
She was truly the most beautiful woman he had ever seen. He knelt before her, and asked her to be his wife.
He gave her a colourful apron, beads, and a head ring, the sign of a married woman. And he built her a house with the mud and grass that used to lie at the foot of her trunk. "Only one thing I beg of you," he said to his wife. "Never tell anyone where you come from."
But before long, the young men from a neighbouring village began talking among themselves. "How can such an old man have such a beautiful young wife?" So they decided to steal her and take her to their own kraal.
The old man was heartbroken. He felt he could not live without her. But then he thought, "Perhaps if I have something of hers, I would not feel so sad?" So he sent his doves to find her, to sing to her, and to bring back something of hers to him.
When they found her, they sang to her in the language of birds. "Tree woman, tree woman. More beautiful than any other. Your husband has sent us. To bring back your apron!"
She gave them her apron, and they flew over the hill, over the river, back to her husband. He held the apron to his face, and was comforted for a little while.
But his longing did not go away. So again he sent his doves to sing to her:Tree woman, tree woman! More beautiful than any otherYour husband has sent us To bring back your head ring! And back they flew with the head ring, the sign of a married woman.
He held the head ring and sighed for his wife, far away in the kraal of other people. He called his doves again. He told them to go to her and sing: Tree woman, tree woman More beautiful than any other Your husband has sent us To bring back your life!
So away they went the third time. They perched on her shoulders. As they sang, each bird pecked out an eye. Immediately she turned again into a statue. Her feet and arms fell away. Then her head. And she fell to the ground.
Her husband slowly rolled her wooden trunk to the river. He stood her up with her roots in the water. Nourished by sun and soil, she grew leaves again.
And when the wind blows, the leaves sigh. Just as a woman does when she longs for her husband.
Njalo Ngwenya abedla tinhlanti phansi emfuleni.Mfene adla titselo etulu esihlanhleni.
Wagula kakhulu umntfwana Ngwenya.Gogo Ngwenya watsi abatfole sibindzi lesincane semfene kutomelapha.
Ngwenya wamema Mfene ekhaya lakhe lelihle, ngobe angakwati kubhukusha wamema emhlane wakhe lomubi.
Ekhatsi nemfula Ngwenya wacocela Mfene kutsi ugulelwa ngumntfwana, kute aphile udzinga sibindzi lesincane semfene.
“Hhawu, mnganami, ngabe usho singakesuki, phela sibindzi sami sihlala esihlaleni,” kusho Mfene.“Asijike sisilandze.”
Nembala bajike.Mfene azubele esihlahleni atsi nya.Ngwenya walindza.
Ngwenya walindza sikhatsi lesidze, kepha do! Mfene kubuya.
Many years ago,  the Lizard and the Frog were friends. One day  they decided to look for girlfriends in the city.
The Frog was jealous of  the Lizard's shining and brilliant skin.
He said,  "What did you do to look so beautiful? Look at me,  I am so ugly. What can I do about my skin?"
The Lizard said,  "Listen! Put some water in a pot and put it on the fire. Next you....."
But the Frog said,  "I know already,  I know! Keep quiet,  my friend!" And he left.
Frog arrived home and put some water in a pot.
When the water began to boil,  he threw himself into it.
His skin was burnt and his tail came off!
Instead of being brilliant and beautiful like the Lizard,  he was even more ugly!
I dance when I am happy, I dance when I am sad, I dance when I am lonely, I dance when I am angry.
My teacher says, "Sit still! Don't dance about all day."
But my mother says, "Dancing makes you healthy. Dancing makes you tall. One day you'll be a dancer, And surprise them all!"
And I say, "One day I'll dance and people will pay just to see me leap and twirl."Her dancing is SO good," they'll say."
One day, mama bought different fruits.
"When can we have some fruit?" we asked. "We will eat the fruit tonight," said mama.
My brother Rahim is greedy. He tasted all the fruit. He ate a lot of it.
"Look at what Rahim did!" shouted my little brother. "Rahim is naughty and selfish," I said.
Mama was angry with Rahim.
We were also angry with Rahim. But Rahim was not sorry.
"Are you going to punish Rahim?" asked little brother.
"Rahim, you will be sorry soon," warned mama.
Rahim started feeling unwell.
"My stomach is painful," whispered Rahim.
Mama knew why Rahim was sick. "The fruit is punishing Rahim," she thought.
Later, Rahim said sorry to us. "I will never be so greedy again," he promised. We believed him.
Once upon a time,  the animals decided to have a party. But it was not for all of them. It was only for the animals that had horns.
The rabbit was getting ready for the party. But then he found out that the party was not for everyone. It was just for animals with horns.
The rabbit went somewhere and got some horns. Then he put them on his head and went to the party.
During the party the rabbit ate and drank and danced.
This made him tired and he fell down in the sun. But while the rabbit was sleeping,  the horns fell off!
Then all the animals discovered that the rabbit was not the kind of animal they wanted. So they pulled his ears till they got bigger and bigger.
Then they ran away. And that's the reason why rabbits have big ears!
This is cow. Cow is cool!
By day,  it is an ordinary cow.
Flying a kite.
Kicking a ball.
By night,  a supercow!
Saving lives.
And fighting crime.
But if you close your eyes really tight,  and make a wish.
Cow might come to visit you too!
The end.
There once lived a chicken, called Cikizwa, who was an orphan.One day Cikizwa was out looking for food when she saw a mole coming out of his hole. She started speaking to the mole, but he ignored her.
From that day on, the mole and Cikizwa became great friends. The friends often hugged each other tightly. They loved and looked after each other.
Elephant often said really unkind things to Cikizwa to try and make her unhappy. One morning, when Cikizwa greeted Elephant, he snubbed her and said, “Ha, ha, ha! Go away, you orphan! What do you want from me? You’re so skinny. It’s as if you haven’t had enough mealies to eat!” Cikizwa was heartbroken.
The next day it rained and rained. It rained so heavily that many animals were swept away by the nearby river. Cikizwa was safe in her little coop because her father had been clever enough to build a drain nearby so that it didn’t get flooded.
But Cikizwa still felt sad about what had happened to some of her friends.Once the rain stopped, beautiful, colourful flowers appeared and there was a cool breeze. Cikizwa was out enjoying the sunshine when she saw Elephant limping along and crying loudly. Kind Cikizwa quickly called an ambulance.
When the ambulance arrived, Elephant got the help he needed. His leg was bandaged and he was given an injection to help with the pain. As soon as Elephant started to feel better, he thanked Cikizwa for her kindness.Then he said, “Cikizwa, my child, never change who you are. Keep on respecting and loving everyone.”
But Gumbi and Cikizwa didn’t care. They became even closer. Gumbi taught Cikizwa how to swim and dive, and Cikizwa taught Gumbi how to scratch in the sand for food.Eventually Gumbi asked Cikizwa to marry him. Cikizwa agreed immediately. Together they decided to have their wedding the following Saturday at a place that they both loved near the river.
Their wedding day arrived. The sun was blazing hot. What a wonderful wedding it was!The animal choir sang beautifully. Iguanas, whales, crocodiles, seals, sharks, dolphins, sheep, cattle, dogs, antelopes, hares, porcupines, water snakes and other animals all sang together:“It is enjoyable here at the wedding of the fish. It is enjoyable here at the wedding of the chicken!”
Va ku, “Kasi Masingitana i nkata mani? I nkata mfanakuloni.”
Vavasati va chanchula loko va twa xigubu xa Magezi.
Vavanuna va wa mukapa va languta ahenhla na le hansi.
Mudungwazi u ndzuluta mahlo a chongorisa swa mafenya ya yena.
Vakhalabye va ba makhwela va hlakahla tinhloko va twa xigubu.
Vakhegulu va khinyakhinya swisuti va ba nkulungwani wa dzonga.
I love water.
I enjoy playing with water.
It is raining.
Rain gives us water.
I enjoy playing outside.
But it is raining.
I enjoy playing out in the rain.
My hair is wet from playing in the rain. My father is fixing my hair.
In a village on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa,  a little girl worked in the fields with her mother. Her name was Wangari.
Wangari loved being outside. In her family's food garden she broke up the soil with her machete. She pressed tiny seeds into the warm earth.
Her favourite time of day was just after sunset. When it got too dark to see the plants,  Wangari knew it was time to go home. She would follow the narrow paths through the fields,  crossing rivers as she went.
Wangari was a clever child and couldn't wait to go to school. But her mother and father wanted her to stay and help them at home. When she was seven years old,  her big brother persuaded her parents to let her go to school.
She liked to learn! Wangari learnt more and more with every book she read. She did so well at school that she was invited to study in the United States of America. Wangari was excited! She wanted to know more about the world.
At the American university Wangari learnt many new things. She studied plants and how they grow. And she remembered how she grew: playing games with her brothers in the shade of the trees in the beautiful Kenyan forests.
The more she learnt,  the more she realised that she loved the people of Kenya. She wanted them to be happy and free. The more she learnt,  the more she remembered her African home.
When she had finished her studies,  she returned to Kenya. But her country had changed. Huge farms stretched across the land. Women had no wood to make cooking fires. The people were poor and the children were hungry.
Wangari knew what to do. She taught the women how to plant trees from seeds. The women sold the trees and used the money to look after their families. The women were very happy. Wangari had helped them to feel powerful and strong.
As time passed,  the new trees grew into forests,  and the rivers started flowing again. Wangari's message spread across Africa. Today,  millions of trees have grown from Wangari's seeds.
Wangari had worked hard. People all over the world took notice,  and gave her a famous prize. It is called the Nobel Peace Prize,  and she was the first African woman ever to receive it.
Wangari died in 2011,  but we can think of her every time we see a beautiful tree.
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung’s shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife’s homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize’s shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. “It started well,” thinks Mkhize. “But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I’m reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf.”
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung’s kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize’s kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung’s shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. “What are you staring at?” asks Jabu. “Your kota! It looks bigger than mine,” says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu’s is bigger. “Something is not right here,” says Zodwa. “I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize’s shop is not busy anymore.” Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies, “Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!”
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she’s curious. She asks them what’s wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, “A kota is a quarter of a loaf!” Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, “The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters.”
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. “So, he is stealing bread from us!” she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize’s shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren’t new customers. “Oh, hello again kids,” he mutters, “how can I help you?” “Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter,” says Zodwa, pointing at her kota. “I want a quarter kota or my money back,” she adds firmly.
“Is it true Mr Mkhize? You’ve been cheating us!” cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. “What are you saying about me?” he protests. “I’m not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!”
Then Zodwa says quietly, “We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!” Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
“OK,” he says eventually, “I will give you your money back. “And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas,” speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, “I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas.”
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.
Once long ago,  the birds had a meeting. They wanted a king.
The Eagle wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "Your call is too sad to be king." The Ostrich wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You can't fly."
Peacock wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You are too proud. You cannot be king." Owl wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You sleep during the day. You cannot be king."
And so they did not get too far. Then one bird said,  "Who can fly the highest? That bird should be king." All the birds flew up up up into the sky.
Goose flew over the highest mountains in the world. Eagle flew into the blue above the mountains. But Vulture flew without stopping,  up towards the sun.
High above them,  the birds heard Vulture cry,  "I am the highest,  I am king!"
Vulture heard a tiny voice,  "Tink,  tink,  tink! I am the highest,  I am king." It was Ncede,  the Neddicky,  the smallest bird of all! He had held onto the feathers of Vulture as he flew up into the sky!
So Vulture flew down with the little bird still under his wing. The other birds were cross with Ncede. They waited for him,  ready to pluck out all his feathers.
But the quick little bird saw how angry they were,  and flew into an empty snake hole.
The birds told Owl to wait near the hole and catch him when he comes out. So Owl sat in front of the hole.
But the sun was warm and soon Owl was fast asleep. The little bird peeped out,  saw that Owl was asleep,  and z-zip,  away he went.
Owl was very ashamed that he had let the little bird escape. Now he only hunts at night. In the day,  he sleeps,  away from the sight of the other birds.
One day, Dog found eggs at the river
Dog put the ten eggs in his bag.
Dog looked after the eggs and kept them warm.
Crocodile asked Dog, “Have you seen my eggs?”
Crocodile asked all animals about her eggs.
Meanwhile, the eggs hatched one by one.
Dog could not give the young crocodiles enough food.
One day, Crocodile heard the rumbling bellies of young crocodiles!
Crocodile went inside and hit Dog with her tail.
Crocodile chased Dog down the road.
Dog stopped and said to Crocodile,“I am sorry!”
Crocodile forgave him and went to swim with her children.
Tom carries a tray of ripe bananas.
Tom goes to the market to sell bananas.
People at the market are buying fruit.
But no one is buying Tom's bananas. They prefer to buy fruit from women.
"In our community,  only women sell fruit," people say. "What kind of a man is this?" people ask.
But Tom does not give up. He calls,  "Buy my bananas! Buy my sweet ripe bananas!"
One woman picks up a bunch of bananas from the tray. She looks at the bananas carefully.
The woman buys the bananas.
More people come to the stall. They buy Tom's bananas and eat them.
Soon,  the tray is empty. Tom counts the money he earned.
Then Tom buys soap,  sugar,  and bread. He puts the things in his tray.
Tom balances the tray on his head and goes home.
The Winter cold had passed. Spring was coming to Nkanyezi’s village. Soon the villagers would gather to celebrate the new season. Nkanyezi looked forward to the Spring festival more than any other day in the year.
One warm morning, Nkanyezi overheard two village elders talking about the festival.“The people of Ndlovu have lost their spirit of celebration,” one sighed.“How can we have a Spring festival in a village that has forgotten how to celebrate?” asked another.
Nkanyezi was worried. “How will the sun shine again unless we sing to wake it from its winter slumber?” she asked herself.Nkanyezi thought for a long time.“I must find what we have lost,” she decided.“I must go in search of things that will bring back the spirit of celebration to my village.”
The elders gave Nkanyezi their blessing for the journey. They gave her a bag to carry the things she would find.Nkanyezi was afraid, but she believed she would succeed.
Nkanyezi walked all day. She hiked up a hill, and down into a valley. She sailed across the great river, and climbed between sharp rocks. She marched across the plains until she reached the shadow of the red mountains.
As night was closing in, Nkanyezi arrived at a village of patterns and colours as she had never seen before. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The mother of this tribe gave Nkanyezi a gift.She told the girl, “With love we give to you this paint to restore colour to a village that has gone dull.”Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the paint in her bag. Early the next morning she went on her way again, excited with this gift of colour.
Nkanyezi walked all day, through a vast forest of giant trees. As the sky became too dark for her to see, she heard the sound of beating drums. She hurried towards the drumming, feeling the spirit of dance coming to her tired feet
Nkanyezi found herself in the village of the Bhubezi. People were sitting around a fire, drumming and singing. She had never before heard such wonderful music.She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The Bhubezi invited her to rest and stay the night.
In the morning the chief called on Nkanyezi.“My child,” he said, “here is a special drum. It plays a new song every time you beat it.” Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the drum in her bag. She went on her way again, delighted with this gift of music and dance.
On the third day of her journey, as she passed a field of fat cows, her nose started to tingle. An aroma tickled her taste buds and her mouth started to water. She followed the scent, and arrived in a village to find people standing over steaming pots of stew.This tribe was famous for its feasts and Nkanyezi had never before tasted such flavours. After she had eaten her fill, she told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.
The next day, the council of cooks gave her a secret spice blend.“Our daughter,” they said, “with these spices, happy tummies are guaranteed! We give you the gift of good food.”Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the spices in her bag. She knew she had everything she needed.With new energy she started the long journey back to the village of Ndlovu.
When she arrived home the villagers gathered around her to hear of her adventures. She told them the tales of what she had seen, heard, and eaten. Then she opened her bag to share the gifts given. The people rejoiced to receive these treasures.Through the generosity of others and the courage of Nkanyezi, the villagers again found the colour, song and dance in their lives. And so the spirit of celebration was restored to the village of Ndlovu.
Long ago Hen and Eagle were friends. One day,  Eagle found Hen under a tree resting with her hopping bags. Hen was standing on one leg.
Eagle asked Hen,  "Where is your other leg?"
Hen told Eagle,  "The shopkeeper cut off my leg and gave me these groceries in return."
Eagle asked Hen whether he could do the same. He also wanted a bag of groceries. Hen agreed.
Eagle went to the shopkeeper and asked her to cut off one of his legs in exchange for groceries. The shopkeeper accepted.
The eagle hopped on one leg all the way home. But he was happy with the things the shopkeeper gave him.
When Eagle reached home,  he found Hen with both her legs.
Eagle was furious and chased Hen. But he never caught her. Instead,  Eagle always looks out for Hen's children. Whenever he catches one,  he eats it.
The day that we’re waiting for is coming. It’s going to be Chiefs versus Aces on this very field. Come and watch! Come with your vuvuzela!
“Chiefs, the cup must come to sleep at home,” said Coach. “I want us to work together as a team to defeat the Aces. We must attack cleverly, defend well, and pass to each other.”
Soon we were practising hard. “Pass the ball, pass it, Portia Modise!”“Defend, defend, Jomo!”“There it is, there it is, into the goals!”Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! sounded the vuvuzela.
“You played wonderfully, my beautiful Chiefs!You attacked cleverly, you defended well, and you passed to each other. You played as a real team!”
“High five to all of you! Well done!” said Coach.
We went home really tired, but the practice was good.“When is the real match, Coach?” we asked.
Finally the day came. “Halala Chiefs, halala! It’s going to be a good game. The cup is ours!” said Coach. Po-o-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o-o! sounded the vuvuzela.
And then there was a surprise. “What beautiful kit!  Thank you, Coach. We play the best, and now we also look the best!”
Not here, not there.Where have you gone?
Not on the sofa.Not under the cot.
Not in the box.Not under my sister's frock.
Not under the pillow.Not in my bag.Sob, sob, where have you gone?
I have looked in every room, l have looked under every book.
I have looked under the chair,I have looked under the stool.Where have you gone?
Soon granny came back from her walk."Look what I found in the park."
"It can sway, it can bounce.It can spin, it can dangle.Ha-ha, hee-hee," said Granny with a giggle.
Oh Granny! Thank you so much!You have found my dear yo-yo!
"Yo-yo? What a funny name!What a funny toy!I want to play with it,It gives me so much joy!"
Giggle, giggle, giggling away,Granny played, with my little toy.For the rest of the day!
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung’s shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife’s homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize’s shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. “It started well,” thinks Mkhize. “But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I’m reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf.”
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung’s kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize’s kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung’s shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. “What are you staring at?” asks Jabu. “Your kota! It looks bigger than mine,” says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu’s is bigger. “Something is not right here,” says Zodwa. “I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize’s shop is not busy anymore.” Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies, “Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!”
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she’s curious. She asks them what’s wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, “A kota is a quarter of a loaf!” Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, “The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters.”
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. “So, he is stealing bread from us!” she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize’s shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren’t new customers. “Oh, hello again kids,” he mutters, “how can I help you?” “Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter,” says Zodwa, pointing at her kota. “I want a quarter kota or my money back,” she adds firmly.
“Is it true Mr Mkhize? You’ve been cheating us!” cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. “What are you saying about me?” he protests. “I’m not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!”
Then Zodwa says quietly, “We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!” Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
“OK,” he says eventually, “I will give you your money back. “And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas,” speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, “I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas.”
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.
“I can’t lift you up, Shanu!” says Ammi. “You are too big!”
“You can’t walk to school alone, Shanu!” says Abbu. “You are too small!”
“You can’t sleep in the baby’s cot, Shanu!” says Dadu. “You are too big!”
“You can’t carry the baby to the park, Shanu!” says Dadi. “You are too small!”
Shanu is puzzled. Too big! Too small! How can she be too big andtoo small all at once?
Too big to wear her old pink frock.Too small to make dosas at the stove.
Too big to climb up on Dadu’s back?Too smallto carry the baby on hers?
“What am I the right size for?” Shanu wonders.
Ammi smiles and says, “Why, you are just big enough to go to big school.”
“And you are just small enough for me to carry you on my shoulders,” says Abbu.
“You are just big enough to take me for my morning walks,” says Dadu.
“And you are just small enough for me to tell stories to,” says Dadi.
“And you will always, always be the perfect size...for this!" all say, and give her a warm, wonderful hug.
Hi siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu lembe na lembe, tiko ri tsundzuka valweri va ntshunxeko.Vanhu lava a va lwela milawu leyi a tshikilela vantima va Afrika-Dzonga.
Hi siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu 1960, vaakatiko va Sharpville na Langa va sungule ku tereka.Va machile va lwa na nawu wo famba na mapasi wa mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu.“Amandlaa! Ngawethuu! Amandlaa! Ngawethuu!” ku huwelela ntshungu hi siku ra kona.
ESharpville, a ku yimbeleriwa no machiwa hi kurhula ku ya exiticini xa maphorisa.Loko maphorisa va vona ntshungu, maphorisa ma hlasela vamachi.Vanhu va baleka, van’wana va vaviseka, van’wana va lahlekeriwa hi vutomi.
Siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu ri sungule ri tsundzukiwa tanihi Siku ra Sharpville.Endzhaku ka nhlawulo wa mani na mani wa 1994, siku leri ri endliwile holideyi.Hi siku leri, tiko ri tsundzuka vanhu lava lahlekeriweke hi vutomi. I ndlela yo khensa eka vona.
Afrika-Dzonga ri na Vumbiwa bya xidemokirasi. Lava tsaleke Vumbiwa byintswa va lave leswaku ku van a ku xixima timfanelo ta ximunhu.Vumbiwa bya Afrika-Dzonga byi andlarile timfanelo na mitirho ya lava tshamaka etikweni. Vanhu hinkwavo va ringana.
Lembe na lembe hi siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu i holideyi. Tihofisi na swikolo swa pfala.I siku ro tlangela timfanelo ta ximunhu. I siku ro tlangela ku ringana ka vanhu.Vanhu va tlangela na ku xixima siku leri hi tindlela to hambana.
Vana va nga tlangela siku leri hi ku vulavula hi timfanelo ta vona.Ina, vana na vona va na timfanelo!Timfanelo ta vana i timfanelo to hlawuleka ta ximunhu. Timfanelo ta vana va le hansi ka 18 wa malembe.
Vana hinkwavo va ringana hi timfanelo. Wa ti tiva timfanelo ta wena?“Mfanelo yo hlayisiwa,” ku vula Ntombi.“Mfanelo yo va na vito!” ku huwelela Nsuku.“Mfanelo yo tshama etikweni ra mina kumbe rin’wana,” ku vula Shadrack.
“Mfanelo yo sirheleriwa,” ku vula Melanie endzhaku.“Mfanelo yo dyondza,” ku vula Arnold.“Mfanelo YO KA U NGA vavisiwi kumbe ku xanisiwa,” ku vula Nhlayiselo.
Leti hi tin’wana ta timfanelo leti vana va nga na tona.Hi na timfanelo na mitirho. Hi na timfanelo na vutihlamuleri.Hi yihi mitirho na vutihlamuleri swa hina?“Ntirho yo endla mitirho ya mina ya le kaya,” ku vula Ann
“Vutihlamuleri byo langutela miri na miehleketo swa mina. Swi fanele ku va eka rihanyo lerinene,” ku vula Nsuku.“Ntirho wo khoma van’wana leswi hi lavaka va hi khomisa swona,” ku vula Cheyeza.“Vutihlamuleri byo tirha kahle exikolweni,” ku vula Mixo.
“Ndzi na vutihlamuleri byo hlonipha timfanelo ta van’wana,” ku vula Lerato.Hinkwerhu hi na vutihlamuleri byo hlonipha timfanelo ta van’wana.Siku ra Timfanelo ta Ximunhu i siku ra ku ringana ka timfanelo ta vanhu hinkwavo.
Bunty loves to play with butterflies.
And with birds.
She loves to play with paper boats.
She also likes to make sand castles.
When Bunty goes back home, her mother asks her to clean up. She refuses.
"I hate soap!" she screams.
One night, she has a dream. The germs are all around her castle, and are attacking her.
Bunty is chased by the germs. She runs for her life and screams, "Help. Help!"
Suddenly, Soap King Bubbly appears. "Bunty, don't be afraid," he says. "Go attack the germs!" the Soap King orders his army of bubbles.
The army of bubbles chases the germs away.
These days, Bunty likes to use soap, and she brushes and scrubs herself clean.
bunty loves to play with butterflies
and with birds too
she loves to play with paper boats
she also loves to make sand castles
when bunty returned home her mom asks her to clean herself but she refuses
i hate soaps she screams
one night bunty had a dream germs and bacteria are attacking on her palace
bunty run for her life she screams help help
suddenly soap king bubbly appears bunty don't be afraid go attack the germs said king bubbly to his army of bubbles
bubbles attacked the germs and make them go away
now bunty loves to rub and scrub herselfs
Afrika-Borwa e hweditše tokologo ka di 27 Moranang 1994.E be e le la mathomo bathobaso ba bouta dikgethong tša Afrika-Borwa.Re keteka mafelelo a kgethologanyo ya merafe, le mathomo a temokrasi.
Temokrasi ke mokgwa wo batho ka moka ba bagolo ba kgonago go bouta.Batho ba bouta le go kgetha baetapele ba mmušo dikgethong.Mmušo wa kgethologanyo ya merafe wa Afrika-Borwa o be o sa dumelele Bathobaso go bouta.
Balwela tokologo ba bantši ba be ba sa kwane le mmušo wa kgethologanyo ya merafe.Nelson Mandela ke molwela tokologo wa go tsebega kudu.O ile a ya kgolegong mengwaga ye 27 ka ge a be a lwela temokrasi.
Melokoloko ya batho e tsogetše mafelong a go bouta ka di 27 Moranang 1994.Lefelo la go bouta ke mo re boutelago gona.Ge re bouta, re kgetha batho ba re nyakago ba eta pele mmušo.
Batho ka moka ba be ba thabetše go bouta dikgethong tša mathomo tša temokrasi Afrika-Borwa.Melokoloko e be e ye ye metelele.Letšatši le be le fiša kudu.Fela batho ka moka ba thabetše tokologo.
Nelson Mandela o gopola letšatši le lebotse le ka kgahlego.Ga a lebale melokoloko ye metelele ya batho ye e bego e bonala mebileng.O re seswantšho se sa dikgetho se ka se tloge monaganong wa gagwe.
Maafrika-Borwa ka moka a mengwaga ye 18 le go feta a ka bouta.Nageng ka bophara, re be re letetše go ya mafelong a go kgetha.Re eme go fihlela bošego, mafelelong ka moka ra kgona go bouta.
Mafelo a go bouta a ile a tswalelwa. Dibouto tša thoma go balwa.Ke nako ya go tseba gore batho ba kgethile mang gore a buše naga.Batho ba dimilione tše 20 ba boutile ka di 27 Moranang 1994.
Mokgatlo wa African National Congress o hweditše dibouto tše dintši kudu.ANC ya thopa dikgetho tša mathomo tša temokrasi!Nelson Mandela e be e le moetapele wa ANC. Ke yena mopresidente wa mathomo wa Afrika-Borwa ya temokrasi.
Mmušo o dirile letšatši la 27 Moranang la bokhutšogohle, gore re kgone go le keteka ngwaga ka ngwaga.Letšatši le le emetše khutšo le poelano.Re le keteka ka go kgobokana ditediamong ka ge le le bohlokwa.Re le keteka ka mmino, direto le dipolelo.
Ka letšatši la tokologo, re hlompha balwela tokologo ba rena.Re keteka bofelo bja kgethologanyo ya merafe.Re keteka ditokelo tša batho ka moka tša go bouta.Ebile re tshepiša le go netefatša tokologo le tekano ya batho ka moka. Ye ke yona temokrasi!
Dikgetho tša Afrika-Borwa di rulaganywa ke Independent Electoral Commission (IEC).IEC e netefatša gore dikgetho tša rena di laetša “tokelo ya boikgethelo”. Na o nagana gore seo se ra goreng?Nyakišiša go ya pele ka mošomo wa mokgatlo wo.
Long time ago,  there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark,  they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said,  "I am a louse. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu."
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate,  drank,  and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left,  they had a bad thought. They said,  "No,  it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse."  Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone,  and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
Chat was born blind. Her eyes had never seen her parents, or her brothers and sisters. She knew their faces by touch.
One day, Chat was strolling in the garden. She liked the sweet scent of flowers. She loved to touch their soft petals.
Chat wished she could see flowers, just once. "They are lovely," she said to herself.
Every day, Chat walked in the garden. She knew her way around. Today, she raised her head to the skies.
Suddenly, she heard thunder and lightning. "I need to hurry back to the house," Chat thought.
Rain began to fall. Chat slipped, lost her balance and fell. She hit her head on a stone.
When Chat woke up, there were people around her. "What happened?" she asked.
"You fell and bumped your head," her father said. "Thank God you are fine," said her mother.
"Daddy, mummy?" asked Chat. She also called the names of her brothers and sisters. "Please, get me a flower."Everyone was surprised.
Her sister returned with a flower. Chat held it gently. "It is so lovely," she said.
Her family looked at one another. "Chat, can you see the flower?" her mother asked.
Chat played with the flower in her hand. "You are all so beautiful, just like this flower," she smiled.
This is Lekishon. Lekishon is calling his dog.
Lekishon and his dog are going to graze the animals. The sun is hot.
Lekishon and his dog are thirsty and hungry.
They go to look for water.
Lekishon loses track of his cows.
Lekishon starts to cry.
He decides to go home with his dog.
The cows found the way home! Lekishon and his dog are very happy.
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung's shop,  the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife's homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize's shop,  the chips are nearly ready,  but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. "It started well," thinks Mkhize. "But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I'm reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf."
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung's kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize's kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung's shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. "What are you staring at?" asks Jabu. "Your kota! It looks bigger than mine," says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough,  Jabu's is bigger. "Something is not right here," says Zodwa. "I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize's shop is not busy anymore." Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies,  "Well,  I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!"
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she's curious. She asks them what's wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together,  "A kota is a quarter of a loaf!" Nomsa still looks confused,  so Zodwa explains,  "The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise,  they are not quarters."
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. "So,  he is stealing bread from us!" she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize's shop to complain. She marches off,  holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren't new customers. "Oh,  hello again kids," he mutters,  "how can I help you?" "Mr Mkhize,  I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter," says Zodwa,  pointing at her kota. "I want a quarter kota or my money back," she adds firmly.
"Is it true Mr Mkhize? You've been cheating us!" cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. "What are you saying about me?" he protests. "I'm not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!"
Then Zodwa says quietly,  "We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!" Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
"OK," he says eventually,  "I will give you your money back. "And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas," speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear,  "I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas."
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him,  and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung,  and everyone is happy.
It is Rani's first day at school.Her mother is holding her hand and walking her to school."I am grown up now", Rani says to her mother. "Let go my hand, let go!"Her mother holds her hand even more tightly.
There were many children reaching the school already.Some children came by bus, by car, some by rickshaw, cycle.And some came by walking, just like Rani.
Rani and her mother reached the school gate, and her mother let go off her hand.Her mother stays at the gate. Now Rani has to go inside alone.There are many new faces all around her.
She takes one step, then another. She looks back, her mother was getting smaller and smaller as she walks away. She thinks. will my mother disappear and feels scared so runs back to her.She doesn't feel so grown up and holds her mother's hand and says "Don't go away".
All the students were inside by now, Rani was the only one outside.The teacher comes out and smiles at Rani. Rani smiles back at her teacher and let go off her mother's hand. Her mother says, "Rani, I will be here when you come out."Her mother waves to her and goes away.
Rani went inside. She was now happy, her mother will be there after school!
Long time ago, there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark, they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said, "I am a louse*. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu**."* A small parasitic insect** A Southern African drink
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate, drank, and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left, they had a bad thought. They said, "No, it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse." Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone, and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
There was a dark jungle.
It was a big dark jungle. There were lots of trees and a narrow path. Many animals and birds lived here.
One day,  all the animals came together. "Did you hear?" asked Tota,  the parrot. "Yes," said Hirni,  the deer. "What?" asked Darpok,  the rabbit. "We have a school in the jungle," answered Zhoola,  the monkey. Mota,  the elephant wondered,  "Hmph?" Lamboo,  the giraffe said,  "Oh,  good!" Dheema,  the snail squealed,  "Hurry,  let's go!"
Tota,  the parrot flew ahead. Zhoola,  the monkey jumped from tree to tree. Poorakha,  the python slithered fast. "Here!" shouted Tota. "Can you read?" "It is upside down,  I think," said Zhoola hanging by the branch. Poorakha concluded,  "Hisssss. No one can read."
Soon,  all the other friends joined them. Lamboo looked over the tree. "No one here," he said. Zhoola repeated,  "No one here." Tota proposed,  "Look carefully!" Pilloo,  the little bear declared,  "I found a room!"
"I found a swing",  announced Dheema. "What are these blocks?" Darpok wanted to know. "What is this?" was Zhoola's question. Poorakha explained,  "I believe,  this is a pencil."
Moto and Lamboo found a classroom. They called the others,  "Look,  what is this?" Everyone came with school bags. They began shouting,  "Teacher! Teacher! Where is our teacher?" No one knew.
Then they heard a roar. They heard a loud roar. They heard a louder roar. Poorakha was worried. Dheema was scared. Tota hid behind the board. Lamboo and Zhoola were puzzled.
Who is this? "Hup!" said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke. They all looked at the teacher. Up and down carefully. Then they looked at one another.
The teacher turned to write on the black board. "Jump," said Zhoola. "Fly! Said Tota. Thump,  thump,  thump ran Mota. "Run,  run run fast," screamed Dheema. "Bhagoooo," they all shouted together. When the teacher turned. There was no one in the class."
For the children in every country of Africa
One day, my big sister  Zinhle had this idea. "I am going to make masks for those people in the community who don't have masks!" she said. "That's a good idea! Let's tell Mama and Baba when they get home!" I said.
When Mama and Baba arrived home, we told them about Zinhle's idea. "That's a good idea, my child!" Baba said, and Mama agreed. "I will ask our church members to give us cloth to make the masks. Let's ask Gogo to help with sewing."
The next day, the church ladies dropped off colourful cloth and elastic at our house.Zinhle left some cloth and elastic in a bag outside Gogo's door, with a note asking Gogo to help.
Zinhle started stitching masks and Wandile and I watched her. Zinhle is very good at stitching. She stitched many masks. Wandile and I counted the masks, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, then, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, then, 100!
Zinhle and Gogo made enough masks for everyone in the community! We helped them!Mama and Baba were so proud.
The next day, Baba and Mama were not working. They decided to give out the masks to anyone who needed a mask. Zinhle carried Mama's hand sanitiser and sprayed people's hands. "Remember to wash your mask every day," said Mama.
Now when Zinhle goes to get water, everyone is wearing masks. Everyone looks and feels safer.
Later, Mama asked, "Children, what do we do after we touch anything?""We wash our hands with soap and water!" Wandile said. "Or use sanitiser," I added.Mama smiled, "And what do we wear when we go out?" We all shouted, "Our masks!"
1. Wash your hands with water.2. Use soap to wash your hands.3. Wash for 20 seconds or slowly count from 1 to 20.4. Rinse your hands with water.5. Dry your hands with clean towel or tissue.6. Now your hands are clean!
When Rohan woke up, he began to play with Jimmy, his dog.“There’s something you should do first!” said Riya, his big sister. “BRUSH YOUR TEETH!”WOOF!
“I don’t want to brush my teeth! Jimmy doesn’t brush his teeth!”“Animals take care of their teeth too, but in other ways! We must brush our teeth to keep germs away!”“Germs?”“Germs are very tiny creatures that you cannot see. If you don’t brush properly, they stay in your mouth and hurt you!”“Ouch!”“YES! That’s why we must take good care of our teeth by brushing twice a day - morning and night!”“But brushing is no fun!”“I’ll tell you a secret, Rohan! Psst…”  Rohan smiled.
Mummy called out, “It’s breakfast time!” “There’s something we should do first!” said Riya. “WASH OUR HANDS!”WOOF!
“But Jimmy never washes his hands!”Riya laughed, “He doesn’t use his hands or paws to eat like we do! We must wash our hands with soap to get rid of germs.”“Are germs on our hands too?”“Germs are EVERYWHERE!”WOOF!“Aaaah-chhhooo!” Riya covered her mouth with her hands as she sneezed.“Don't do that! My teacher says that we should sneeze into our sleeve, not our hands!" said Rohan.“Why?”“Because when we sneeze into our hands, germs stick to them. If we don’t wash our hands, we spread germs and make others sick!”
“Here comes Germy!” Riya shouted, chasing Rohan and waving herdirty hands.  “EEEEEEEK!”WOOF!
Later Riya showed Rohan the proper way to wash hands. “Wet your hands and turn off the tap. Then rub in some soap on the palms, the back of the hands and between the fingers. Scrub hands for twenty seconds! Now, it’s time to rinse off and dry!”“But that’s a long time!”“Remember my secret?”Rohan smiled.
When they came back home after playing, Riya nudged Rohan, “There’s something we should do first!”Mummy teased, “Play some more?”“TAKE A BATH!”“Mummy, don’t you know that germs are everywhere? We can’t see them, but they stick to our skin and clothes!”“That’s why we must bathe every day…” “…to get rid of them!”
"Start by getting yourself wet,” said Mummy. “Then apply soap all over!” Riya and Rohan giggled as Mummy’s ticklish fingers soaped them up.“Then it’s time to rinse off!”“And dry with a clean towel!”“SUPERCLEAN!”WOOF! “It’s Jimmy’s turn next!”
“Do you want to listen to a story?” asked Papa.
“There’s something we should do first!” reminded Riya. “Tidy UP!”Rohan yawned. “Do we have to?”“Remember you couldn’t find your ball the other day? Putting things away in the proper place makes it easy to find them later!”“And keeps our house neat!” “You both are so smart!” said Papa proudly. “Bedtime!”“Papa! There’s something we should do first!” said Riya, pulling Rohan along.“Make the germs disappear with our magic secret!”Rohan nodded.
A few minutes later, Mummy and Papa heard a familiar tune. “So that’s your secret!” said Papa. “Humming a song to make brushing fun!”“And while washing our hands too!”“That’s a great idea!” said Mummy.WOOF!Rohan and Riya enjoy taking care of themselves. Do you? They make up a game with the germs and guess who wins?
Germs say, yucky, mucky and dirty is FUN!I say, I brush and wash and I know I have won!Germs say, never bathe, it’s a waste of time!I say, smelling nice with soap is so fine.Naughty germ says don’t pick up your things, The house looks better that way.I say, I tidy up because I like my thingsThat is a good way to end my day!And I feel better in every wayI feel better in every way! I FEEL BETTER IN EVERY WAY!!!!!Now make up your secret song and hum it when you have to do boring things!
A rat has entered the house. Grandma was the first to see it."Rat!" He jumped on the sofa as he shouted.The little pillows in it all fell down.
"Where?" Dad climbed out the window as he heard that.The curtains all fell down as he pulled."There!" Mom jumped on the table shouting. The plates in it fell down and broke.
﻿"Catch the mouse," Mithun looked at the cat and shouted.The cat saw the mouse, then ran away and crawled under the bed."Rat!" Mithun ran after the cat shouting.
"I will chase away that rat," said the mother boldly.He took a broom and stabbed here and there."You're a rat," Dad shouted. Mom saw the rat and he too hid under the cot.
"I know how to get rid of this rat!" Grandma jumped down from the sofa. He rolled up a newspaper and stabbed it here and there.
"Rat!" Said Dad. He climbed a little further up the window."Left with you!"Grandma looked at the mouse. He too ran and hid under the bed.
"Damn!" Said Dad. He could not climb above it.Slowly descended from the window. He hid under the bed without catching the mouse's eye!
“Rat! Rat! ” That everyone shouted together.Papa woke up to that noise.She sat up in bed and rubbed her eyes gently.Um, of course, yes, I know this, why it's something known in advance.
It had two eyes, four legs, and a long tail."Rat!" Papa clapped his hands happily.Papa looked at the rat and the rat started to run. Papa also ran backwards!
Climb on the sofa, jump out the window, jump on the table, roll on the pillows ...
... slipped between the curtains, stumbled on the plates, and ran out the door!
One special Friday Yusuf ’s father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woollen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf ’s eyes brighten when Papa says, “Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you.”
A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer’s Corner.Gulls circle the sky. “Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” they cry. “What will you bring back for Yusuf?”Papa rings his bell. “Wait and see what it will be!”
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf ’s grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa’s arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple.Papa sings as he works: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf ’s father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls. “What will you do to help the turtles?”Papa said, “We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one.”
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. Mother wants a new dress.“Don’t be silly,” says Ouma. “You’ll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There’s not so many fish left in the sea.”Yusuf holds Ouma’s hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. “What is for supper?”
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls.“There’s enough sea for everybody,” said Yusuf ’s father. He showed them the fishing licence that had been Oupa Salie’s. “Waves for all. Water for free.”
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What will Yusuf ’s father bring from the ocean?”
Yusuf’s father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf’s father untangles the nets, singing to the shark: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa’s finger.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What did you bring back for Yusuf?”As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. “A lucky shark tooth for my boy.”At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
1-2-3-4Wash and help and wash some more.
5-6-7-8Hello, friend! I'll give you space.
9-10-11-12Keep those germs to yourself!
13-14-15-16Elbow bumps are the new "thing".
17-18-19-20We wear our masks, though they feel funny.
Sing this song with all your heart. Kids who care all do their part!
On Sunday, Jimmy Zogba scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your zebra hair? Your hair’s so plain, like you don’t care.”
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your fake tattoo? Your skin’s so boring. You are too.”
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your bling? Your teeth are wonky, that’s the thing.”
That day, Rafiki walked home slowly.
“Auntie, can I have zebra hair?” “I can’t cut you zebra hair. Actually, I wouldn’t dare.”
“My skin’s so boring, Sisi. Can you make a fake tattoo?”“You don’t need one to look like you.”
“Mkhulu, I wish I had some bling.” “Bling, my child, don’t mean a thing.”
The next weekend, Santi Ramires scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
“Hey, Rafiki! Looking fine!”
Rafiki shrugged. “I look like me; this style is mine.”
Once upon a time, Jackal was walking around the bush. He was very hungry. He saw Crow flying above the trees with a big piece of cheese in his mouth.
"Hmmm that cheese looks delicious! I must find a way to get it," thought Jackal. "Oh, I have a plan!" said Jackal to himself while wiping his mouth quickly. He did not want Crow to notice that he was hungry.
Crow had been flying the whole morning. He was tired. He decided to sit on a branch of a tree. Jackal sat down under the tree where Crow was sitting.
Jackal called with a huge smile, "Hello Crow! You're looking very good today. Your feathers look glossy and healthy. You must be taking very good care of yourself."
Crow was very flattered to hear this. Crow always thought he was the strongest and most beautiful of all the other birds.
"I hear you also have the most beautiful singing voice of all the other birds. Won't you sing a song for me this morning?"
Crow was so flattered that he stretched his wings and prepared to sing for Jackal. He pushed his chest out and let out a loud pitched sound.
As Crow started singing the cheese fell to the ground, right in front of Jackal. Crow stopped and looked down. Jackal grabbed the piece of cheese and ran into the bush. Crow was left angry and hungry.
Tebello o hodisitswe ke nkgono le ntate moholo wa hae Lesotho. Nkgono le ntate moholo wa hae ba ile ba mohodisa hantle.Letsatsi le leng o ne a eya naheng ho ya hlokomela dinku, letsatsi le latelang a eya sekolong. O ne a kena sekolo ka tsela eo.
Ha Tebello a ne a hlokometse dinku, a bona hore ho na le diphoofolo tse ding le dimela.Tebello o ne a hlile a rata ho sheba dintho ka hloko. O ne a tsotella dintho tse mopotapotileng.Tebello o ile a holela mahaeng, sena se morutile ka tsa tlhao.
Tebello o ne a rata ho ithuta Science sekolong.Ba mobolella hore a se leke hohang. Bare Science e thata hape ke thuto ya bashanyana eseng banana.Pele o qadile a ba mamela. Metswalle ya hae sekolong e ne e etsa tsa Bonono le Botjhaba.O ne a batla ho etsa thuto e fapaneng.
Tebello o ratile ho ithutela Science. O ne a tseba hore Science e ke se e mohlole.Tebello o ile a kopa ho ithutela Science, qetellong ba modumella hore a e etse.A qala ho ithuta Science dilemo tse pedi pele a qeta sekolo!
Tebello a sebetsa ka thata, ho fumana bana ba bang bao esaleng ba ithutela Science.Bohlale le ho rata ho bala dibuka, ho ile hwa mothusa hore a kene university tse ngata.Tebello o kene university tse ngata.A ithuta dintho tsohle dilemong tse pedi empa a pasa!
Tebello o ne a rata Chemistry haholo. Chemistry ke karolo engwe ya science.O ne a tseba hore o batla hoya University hoya ithuta chemistry.A hla a bala dibuka tsa hae.
Tebello aya University ya Lesotho. O ile University kamora ho pasa hantle sekolong.E ne e le moithutwana ya bohlale a bile a sebetsa ka thata haholo. O ne a qeta nako e ngata ya hae ka laboratoring ya Science.O ile a atleha hofumana scholarship sa hoya ithuta Canada.
Tebello o ne a rata ho ithuta ka Science, empa o ne a kgenne ha a ne a siya ba lelapa le metswalle ya hae Afrika.O ile a siya naha ya habo hobane o ne a batla hoba setsebi se seholo sa Science.
Tebello a kopana le metswalle e metjha Canada.Ba ne ba bua puo e fapaneng, empa English ya ba thusa ho buisana.Canada teng, lehlwa le lengata dibakeng tsa bodulo jwalo ka dithabeng tsa Lesotho.Ha lelwa le leteng dithabeng tsa Lesotho, batho ba apara dikobo. Haele Canada batho ba apara dijase.Tebello a fumana scholarship sa hoithutela Science.
Ho ile hwa latela University ya Amerika.Kamora dilemo lemo tsa ho ithuta, Tebello a kgutlela hae South Afrika. O ne a batla ho fana ka tsebo ya hae ho batho ba habo.Tebello o ne a dumela hore ha ho letho le ka mohlolang.
Kajeno, Tebello ke Professor ya Science. O ruta Universithing, hape o na le laboratori ya hae ya Science.Professor Nyokong o e ntse dipatlisiso tse ntjha tsa ho thusa batho ka lefu le lebe la cancer. O thusa le ba ithutelang Science.Professor Nyokong, o thusa batho haholoholo batho ba Afrika.
Mosebetsi wa hae o e ketsa tsebo ya Science, ho thuseng batho ho hlola mafu ana a kotsi.Bophelo ba hae bo bontsha bohlokwa ba ho dumela ho wena le ho se lahle tshepo.Professor Tebello Nyokong o thusa MaAfrika.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
Once upon a time, there were four friends and they decided to do a toy race.
﻿                  Rani has a shiny green car.         Pihu has a black and yellow auto.
﻿               ﻿Rohit has big red bus.      Aman has long blue lorry.
On your marks, get set, ready....  Go!!!!Here comes Lucky- the dog, joining the race.....
﻿ ﻿﻿Everybody staring at Lucky...                   The fastest of all..                         And so the winner is our Lucky!!!!
——Kopano le Lereko ba be ba ja dikuku tšeo mmago bona a ba paketšego.Dikuku tšeo di be di elela tsina.
Lereko o ile a botšiša mma, “Naa tsina e tšwa kae?”“Ngwanaka, dinose di dira tsina,” gwa rialo mma.
“Dinose di dira tsina le modula go tšwa matšobeng,” mma a tšwela pele.“Ge dinose di kgoboketša modula, di dulafatša matšoba.”
Go dulafatŠa ke go thuša dibjalwa go ata ka go phatlalatša modula.Modula o dira karolo ya peu.
“Dinose di rwala modula go tloga dibjalong go ya dibjalong. Di dulafatŠa dimela,” mma a hlaloša.“Dinose di dira gape ditšweletšwa tše bohlokwa.”
“Ke a tseba! Re humana tsina dinoseng,” Kopano a rialo.Lereko a tlatša, “Tsina e tloga e le bose ebile e a latswega.
“Tsina e šomišwa gape mereng le dišeng,” mma a rialo.“Dipilisi le lerole tša go dirwa ka mere le diša di dirilwe ka tsina.”
“Tsina e thuša go fodiša megolo, sehuba le go gohlola.”
“Tsina e thuša go fodiša dikgobadi le dintho tša mollo.”
“E fela le gopole, bana ba ka, tsina ga se e lokele bana.” E ka ba lwatša kudu,” mma a ba lemoša.
“Naa, bjale go reng dinose di le bohlokwa?” mma a botšiša.“Di dulafatša matšoba!” gwa rialo Lereko.“Le go dira tsina!” gwa rialo Kopano.
Go tloga letšatši leo, Kopano le Lereko ba ile ba thoma go hlompha dinose.
Khanyisa le Nthuseng ba boela gae, go tswa kwa sekolong.Letsatsi le a fisa, mme fa ba feta fa bookelong, ba akanya go ikhutsa mo moriting wa boemela bese kwa ntle mo go tsenwang teng.Bookelo bo bo bidiwa Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital.
“Heela, a o a itse gore Charlotte Maxeke e ne ele mang, le gore ke goreng ba neetse bookelo jo leina la gagwe?” Khanyisa a botsisa tsala ya gagwe.Nthuseng a araba, “Le fa ke fetile makgetlho a le mantsi fa, ga ke ise ke akanye ka selo se go fitlha jaanong.”
Moithuti o feta gaufi le basetsana fa ba ntse ba bua. O ithutela ka ga Saense ya tsa pholo kwa Yunibesiting ya Witwatersrand.Nka lo bolelela gore Charlotte e ne ele mang!” Ga bolela Busisiwe, Moithuti.
“Charlotte Makgomo Mannya o belegwe ka 1870,” Busisiwe a simolola.“Ijoo, bokana ka dinyaga di le 150 tse di fitileng!” ga bolela Khanyisa.Ee, go na le ditokomane tseo di farologaneng, mabapi le gore Charlotte o belegwe leng, kwa kae? Bangwe ba re o belegetswe kwa Eastern Cape, bangwe ba re kwa Limpopo,” ga tswelela Busisiwe.
“Charlotte o tsene sekolo sa Boromiwa, ko a falotseng ka maemo a kwa godimo. O ne a na le bokgoni mo malemeng le Dipalo. O ne a kwala ka isiXhosa, Dutch le Seesimane,“Charlotte o weditse dithuto tsa marematlou, ka bonako gona le barutwana ba bangwe,” Busi a emisa.“Lesego Charlotte.” Ga bua Nthuseng.“Botlhale Charlotte.” Ga bua Khanyisa.
“Charlotte o ne a le botlhale, gape a kgona go opela ka lentswe le le monate,” ga bua Busisiwe.“Morago ga phitlhelela ya ditaemane mo Aforika Borwa, Balelapa la ga gaabo Charlotte ba fudugela kwa Kimberly, Kwa Kapa Bophirima.E ne e le morutabana gape a opela le African Jubilee Choir.”
“Charlotte o ne a ya kwa England, le African Jubilee Choir. Ba ne ba opelela batho ba maemogodimo kwa London, mme ba tsaya loeto go ya Amerika.Fa ba le kwa lefatsheng leo, Charlotte a amogela, tlotlomatso ya go ithuta kwa Yunibesiting ya Wilberforce. E le Yunibesiti ya ntlha e tlhomilwe ke MaAforika le MaAmerika.”
“Kwa Amerika, kereke ya gagwe ya mo rotloetsa. A nna Mmadipolotiki. A tsenela dipuisano ka ga ditokelo tsa basadi. O ithutile le Morutegi wa Pan- Africanist e leng W.E. Du Bois.Kwa Yunibesiting ya Wilberforce, Charlotte o kopane le monna wa gagwe, Marshall Maxeke.”
“Charlotte le Marshall ba boetse mo Aforika Borwa go dira jaaka Baromiwa. Ba ne ba batla go netefatsa gore, bana botlhe ba neelwa thuto ya maemogodimo.Kereke e ne ya thusa baratani ba go simolola sekolo kwa Gauteng, go batho bantsho ba Aforika Borwa. Ba bitsa sekolo se Wilberforce Institute, ba teeletse ka Yunibesiti ya bona.”
“Charlotte a ikaegile ka dikamano tsa selegae tsa basadi ba bantsho. A le mo mokgatlhong wa basadi ba mebala yotlhe.O thusitse go rulaganya mogwanto kgatlhanong le melawana ya bokoloniale. O tsenetse megwanto ya badiri, kgatlhanong le tokafatso ya dituelo.Ene ele Moeteledipele wa kereke, morutabana, mokwadi, ele molwela ditshwanelo. E ne e le sekgantshwane!”
Busisiwe a khutlisa, “Ke ithutile ka Charlotte Maxeke gonne ke tlile mo bookelong jo! E ne e bidiwa Johannesburg Hospital, fela leina la fetolelwa go Charlotte Maxeke ka 2008.”“Charlotte Maxeke ke mosadi wa botlhokwa mo Hisitoring!” ga bua Khanyisa.“Ba tshwanetse go re ruta ka ene kwa sekolong!” ga bua Nthuseng.
“Ke tshwanetse go ya phaposing jaanong, salang sentle,” ga bua Busisiwe.“Re lebogela go abelana ka kitso! Re tla nna re gopola Mme’Charlotte, Dr Charlotte Maxeke,” ga bua Khanyisa.“Lo seka lwa lebala, basadi ba bantsho bana le maatla!” ga garela Busisiwe go basetsana.
It was the unusually hot summer holidays. Nomfundo and her family were visiting their relatives in Durban. Inside the house it was as hot as the sun itself.After lunch, Nomfundo took her book and went to cool down at the forest near the house.
The shade of the two tallest trees gave her enough shade to stay there for a while.There was nothing but the sound of birds. How peaceful!
Suddenly, Nomfundo felt something hit her head. "What could that be?"She saw a tiny book next to her. She thought it was her imagination. "I only brought one book here, where is this one coming from?"She looked up the tree, around the tree but did not see anyone.
Then she saw the tiniest animal looking down at her.It was a dormouse, a rare and very shy kind of mouse made completely of fur.They are only found in Asia, Europe and Africa.
Nomfundo looked up again, and this time she saw the dormouse's nose peeping through the branches."Hello, I'm Nomfundo. Have you lost something?" Nomfundo asked the dormouse.The small furry rodent squealed in fright and hid behind a leaf.Then the dormouse moved forward again and spoke with a timid voice, "Hello, I'm Bushy. I lost my book."
"I was reading when suddenly a wind blew up," explained Bushy."I will return your book to you," said Nomfundo."How? You are down there and I am up here," replied Bushy.But Nomfundo was already running home! She had an idea.
Nomfundo went to get the helium balloons that her little brother got for his birthday. She ran back to the forest with the balloons and tied them on a string, around her waist.She floated up the tree."Welcome to the forest canopy," squealed an excited Bushy.
Nomfundo gave the tiny book to Bushy. As a token of friendship, Nomfundo took off one of her ribbons and presented it to Bushy.Bushy tied the ribbon on her tail and the two were friends from that moment."Come, let's explore the forest canopy," said Bushy.
"We must go quietly here, the fruit bat is asleep," whispered Bushy.Bats search for food at night and sleep during the day. They sleep high up in the trees to stay safe from predators.
Next, they came across a colourful frog."Hello Benji, how are you?" Bushy asked the frog.Benji was surprised to see a human in the tree tops! Nomfundo was surprised to see a frog up there!Tree frogs live most of their lives in trees.
Suddenly, Nomfundo heard a loud crying sound! It was a bird calling the dormouse."There's a human! Why is she here?" squawked the Hornbill. "Nomfundo is my friend from the world on the ground," replied Bushy."Please don't be afraid," said Nomfundo, holding out her hand.
The animals welcomed Nomfundo and shared their food with her. But the day is coming to an end, and Nomfundo must leave her friends.She will return to the ground feeling very happy.What a good day she had!
“We have milk, eggs,bread  and vegetables in the fridge,” says Ma.“I’ll cook dinner!” says Pa.“Pa, can you make fried rice?” asks Tara. “Fried rice,” Madhav echoes.
As soon as Tara, Madhav, Ma and Pa enter the house, they know that something is wrong. Very wrong."Chee! What’s that smell?” cries Tara.“A MONSTER!” yells Madhav.
It is hot, dark and stinky. The whole house smells!Where is the smell coming from?
Ma opens the fridge. Everyone covers their noses and mouths.“Hmm, it’s warm inside and the light is off,” says Ma, sticking her arm into the fridge. “What happened?” asks Tara. "The fridge stopped working some time ago," Pa explains. "Without the cold air, everything spoiled,” says Ma, glumly.“Has the milk gone bad?” asks Tara.“Yes, can you smell how sour it is?” asks Ma.“Milk needs to be kept cold to stay fresh,” says Pa.
“Has the bread gone bad?” asks Tara.“Yes, do you see that green stuff? That’s mould,” says Pa, “It grows on the bread.”“Fuzzy,” says Madhav, curiously.“Don’t touch it,” says Pa. “You’ll fall sick if you eat it.”
“Have the vegetables gone bad too?” asks Tara, sadly.“Yes, they’re rotten,” says Ma. “We can’t eat them.”
Invisible MonstersTara and Madhav thought there was an invisible monster in their house. While there was no monster to be found, they were right about there being something invisible!When food goes ‘bad’—meaning it cannot be eaten by human beings—it’s because something invisible has begun to eat the food. These invisible beings are called microbes.Microbes aren’t totally invisible: they’re just very, very, very tiny (tinier than the tiniest insect you’ve ever seen). You need a machine called a microscope to be able to see them. They look something like this.
On Sunday,  Jimmy Zogba scored the winning goal.
On Monday,  the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your zebra hair? Your hair's so plain, like you don't care."
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your fake tattoo? Your skin's so boring. You are too."
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your bling? Your teeth are wonky,  that's the thing."
That day, Rafiki walked home slowly.
"Auntie, can I have zebra hair?" "I can't cut you zebra hair. Actually,  I wouldn't dare."
"My skin's so boring, Sisi. Can you make a fake tattoo?" "You don't need one to look like you."
"Mkhulu, I wish I had some bling." "Bling,  my child,  don't mean a thing."
The next weekend, Santi Ramires scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by. "Hey, Rafiki! Looking fine!"
Rafiki shrugged. "I look like me; this style is mine."
Ball.
My ball.
My red ball.
My big red ball.
I kick.
I kick my ball.
I kick my redball.
I kick my redball hard!
Where?
Where is my ball?
Where is my ballnow?
Where is my redball now?
It is up.
It is high up.
It is high up inthe sky.
It is high up inthe sky. It is over the moon. It is gone!
﻿A fawn was zooming in a race through the forest.
He ran past the rabbit with ease.
He even flew past the big-big elephant.
He jumped over the stream feeling refreshed by the cold water.
He ran past the crumbling wall.
In excitement, he didn't pay attention to where he was running and missed the large boulder. He stumbled and fell.
﻿He got hurt very badly in his leg and couldn't get up.
The monkey massaged his leg. Tears flowed from the fawn's eyes. He couldn't bear the pain.
Brother Bear picked him up and called his mother.
His mother came. She said, “Look, we’ll beat up this bad boulder!”
The fawn said, “Oh, don’t do that or he will also get hurt and start crying.” His mother laughed. So did he.
This Book Was Re-leveled by Abraham Amit George in Jaypee public school G.Noida
Once upon a time, the Eagle and the Hen were great friends. They helped one another in times of need.
They played together. They played with the other animals like the tortoise.
They had a great herd of cows,  sheep, goats and camels. They used to graze together in the plains while playing.
One day hen went to borrow a razor blade from the eagle to shave her children. Eagle gave hen his razor without questioning.
Hen shaved her children neatly. However she forgot to keep the razor safely.
When the eagle came for his razor, hen could not find it. She scratched all over in vain. Eagle became angry and began eating hens chicks.
Hen ran for dear life and went to stay with the humans. Till today hens live with humans and eagles feed on the chickens.
When the last school bell rang, all the children laughed and screamed with joy.                                                    All, except Akku. Akku was ANGRY!
"Akku! Akku! Look at the pretty sunflowers!" said Appa, as they rode   through a field."Oh no! They’re TOO YELLOW! They’re making my eyes hurt!" said Akku.
Akku! Akku! Look! Look at all the monkeys!" said Appa, pointing at the roof of their house.                              "oh no!" said Akku. Go AWAY!
"Here, drink some buttermilk," said Appa. "It’ll cool you down.""NO!" said Akku. "I DON’T WANT ANY!""Try a sip, at least?""OKAY! FINE!" said Akku, and tried a sip.It wasn’t all that bad.She had another sip.  And another.In no time, the glass was empty.
"Would you like a vada?" asked Appa.  "NO" said Akku."Just one little bite?""Okay, FINE!" said Akku, and took a bite. It  was quite good.She took another bite.And another.In no time, the plate was empty.
"Good girl," said Appa. "Now will you tell me why you’re so angry?"    "NO!" said Akku."Was it something I did?""NO!""Was it something Amma did?""NO!""Did something happened in school today?"     "MAYBE!"        "Oho."
"Would you like to draw it?" asked Appa. "Here’s a nice sheet of paper and some crayons."                                                                                                                                     "Okay, FINE!" said Akku.
Akku drew a brick… "This is the BRICK that I tripped over this morning," said Akku.                   "You’re right. That is a  brick!" said Appa.
And Akku drew a boy…"This is Bikku, The BOY who laughed at me when I fell down!" said Akku.                 "You’re right," said Appa. "He shouldn’t have laughed at you."
And Akku drew an idli…    "This is my idli," said Akku. "It fell out of my lunch box when I tripped over the BRICK!"
And Akku drew a crow…                                              "This is the CROW that flew off with my idli," said Akku.                              "The crow must have been very hungry," said Appa.
And Akku drew her teacher…"This is my teacher, Amala Miss," said Akku."She helped me up when I fell down. And then she hugged me.""That’s nice of her," said Appa."And then she patted my back and said, you would be fine. I DON’T like to be hugged and patted."Are you alright now?" I’m okay now."     "That’s good."
"See how well you draw, Akku?" said Appa."You’re a real artist! Will you draw something for Amma too?""Okay!" said Akku, and      started drawing some more. "This is a little white mouse… and this is a boat…and this is a coconut tree…"
"And this is a sunflower…and this is your cycle, Appa… and this is a dog…and this is a frog…"In no time, Akku had forgotten all about the BRICK that made her trip and fall. And about the BOY who laughed at her. And about the IDLI-CROW.And Akku even forgot about being ANGRY.
10 Things to Do If You Feel ANGRY like Akku:1. Laugh loudly and jump around with your arms in the air!2. Slowly – very, very slowly – breathe in, and breathe out!3. Drink some water! Or buttermilk!4. Eat a piece of fruit! Or a vada!5. Tell a grown-up about how you’re feeling!6. Write about how you’re feeling!7. Draw it out! Paint it!8. Play with a pile of clay!9. Make up a song about your anger! Sing it aloud!10. Do the happy dance!
Once upon a time, Lion was the strongest and most feared of all the animals. He would catch other animals and eat them. But one morning while he was looking for his breakfast, he got caught in a hunter's trap.
Lion gave his loudest roar. He pulled and pulled to free himself from the trap. The trap got tighter and tighter around his leg every time he pulled. Lion grew tired and he felt more pain in his leg. Finally, he gave up.
Days went past as Lion lay baking in the sun. He was hungry and thirsty and there was nobody to save him. He became weaker and weaker. "I am going to die of hunger and thirst in this trap," he thought to himself.
One morning, Lion heard a sound coming from the nearby bushes. He listened and looked closer. He saw Warthog walking with his family, talking and laughing. The warthogs were going to the river to drink water and play in the mud before the sun got too hot.
"Warthog! Please help me! Warthog!" cried Lion. "Please set me free from this trap," he pleaded. "Never," said Warthog. "You are a cruel animal. You will eat me and my family for breakfast if I set you free." Lion replied, "I promise I would never do such a bad thing. We will be friends if you can set me free."
Warthog felt sorry for Lion. "I do not like seeing you in such pain, thirsty and dying from hunger," he said. So he pulled at the trap with his long strong tusks and released Lion. Warthog saved his new friend.
"Thank you for saving my life," said Lion. "I must go to my family now,  good bye." Warthog replied, "Go well my friend." He was happy that Lion was his friend. "My family will never have to run from Lion again," he thought.
Lion walked away limping and weak. He was also very hungry. Then he saw Warthog's children playing in the mud. "Today is my lucky day," said Lion with his mouth watering.
"Warthog, my new friend," called Lion. "I have been caught in the trap for days without food. I am too weak to hunt. Please would you give one of your children to me for breakfast?" Warthog was shocked. "I saved you from the trap and now you want to eat my children?"
"I am very sorry my friend," said Lion, "but I am starving. I might be weak right now,  but I am still stronger than you." Lion opened his mouth and showed his strong teeth. "If you do not give me one of your children, I will take one for myself," he roared.
Warthog knew that he did not have the speed or the strength of Lion. He would never be able to protect his children in a fight. "All right," agreed Warthog. "I will give you one of my children. But first I want you to show me how you were caught in the trap. In case I have to save another lion from such a trap."
Lion imagined the wonderful taste of young warthog in his mouth. He could hardly wait. He went back to the trap and put his foot inside, to show his friend how he was trapped.
"Ouch!" Lion roared. Warthog had closed the trap on Lion's foot. "Aha! I got you," said Warthog. "You will stay in that trap hungry and thirsty again. See if your strong teeth and sharp claws can help you now."
"Run! Run! Run away!" Warthog's wife shouted to the children at the top of her voice. "Raise your tails when you are running so that your father can see you," she called. The babies ran as fast as they could through the bushes.
"Warthog please help me!" begged Lion again. He was in pain from the trap. "I will do anything for you if you save me," he cried. "No way, liar! I will never believe you again," shouted Warthog. "I will also warn other animals not to save you because you are very sly."
Warthog saw his children running in a row with their mother. Their tails were lifted up for him to see them. He rushed to his family and they all escaped safely. To this day, warthogs always run with their tails lifted up to see that everyone is safe.
Come back, cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back, cat! That’s way too high.
Come back, cat! Don’t go outside.
Come back, cat! That’s not yours.
Come back, cat. What have you got?
Come back, cat.  That’s not your friend!
Hello, cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It’s nap time now.
Cat?
I wake up at night feeling thirsty. I want to get some water. I start looking for my slippers under the bed.
Oh my God! There is a tiger under my bed.
Now what should I do?
Should I call Ma? What if the tiger roars?
Should I just go back to sleep? But I am not sleepy any more.
Then someone turns on the light. Ma is standing at the door.
“What happened dear?Did you call me?” asks Ma.
I point towards the tiger. Ma bends and pulls the tiger out from under the bed!
Hey, this is no tiger. This is my thick yellow and black sweater. Its buttons shine like a tiger's eyes.
I got scared for nothing!Ma gets me some water.
Now I will sleep. And dream about real tigers in a jungle!
"Lineup class! Let’s go to the park," Laila Miss says.Allthe students hold hands, chattering away. Kavya stands by herself.Asthey start walking, Laila Miss asks, "Does anyone know what acaterpillar becomes when it grows up?"  Kavya’sstomach flips. She knows the answer! Should she say something?
Kavyaand her family have just moved to Bengaluru from her village.Theylive at the construction site where her parents work.It’shard living in a half-finished house. The air smells of smoke, andthe honking traffic makes it hard to sleep. The towering buildings,zooming cars, and busy people make her feel very, very small.
Kavyahas been coming to school for a week. She still hasn’t spoken toanyone.Whatif they make fun of her accent? Or tease her because she’s neverbeen to school before?  Kavyatakes a deep breath and raises her hand. In a noisy city likeBengaluru, she can’t be quiet forever.
"Whencaterpillars grow up, they become butterflies," Kavya says."That’sright!" Laila Miss says."Caterpillarsare only caterpillars for a few weeks," Kavya says. "They spendthat whole time eating leaves." "Theymust get very big," says Mary, her classmate."Theydo!""After they eat and eat and eat, caterpillars weave cocoons on the sides of plants. They go inside, where they grow and change," says Kavya.
"That’scorrect," Laila Miss says. "They stay in the cocoons for abouttwo weeks. When they come out, they are butterflies.""Look,we’re at the park!" Mary says. Kavya gasps. The park is covered in butterflies!
Bluebutterflies the colour of rivers. Yellow butterflies the colour ofsunlight.Orangebutterflies the colour of ripe chikoos. Black-and-white butterfliesthe colours of starry skies.These are all the colours Kavya misses from her village.She feels her heart flutter.
"Every year, butterflies travel thousands of kilometres to come to this park. They are here formore food, better weather, and a safe placeto lay eggs," Laila Miss says.  "This journey is calledmigration."
"Don’tthey get tired, flapping their wings for so long?" a classmateasks."Ifthere is a strong wind, they don’t have to flap their wings,"Kavya says. "They spread their wings and glide.""Thatmust be bumpy," Mary whispers to Kavya.
Kavyathinks about the bus ride to Bengaluru – squeezed in between allthe luggage. Bumping and tumbling for hours and hours and hours. Isthat how a butterfly feels on the wind?
"Whenbutterflies migrate, they follow rivers. To stay healthy, they stopalong the riverbank to soak up minerals with their feet. It’scalled mud-puddling," Laila Miss says."Mud-puddling?"Mary says. "That sounds like fun."Maryand Kavya smile at each other. "Itis," Kavya says. "But now puddles are hard to find."InKavya’s village, men in trucks take sand away from the river. Theweather gets hotter and hotter. There is less and less rain.
Last year, the river went dry. The butterfliesdidn’t have enough water to mud-puddle. Kavya’s family didn’thave enough water to farm.  That’swhy they moved to Bengaluru.
"Youknow a lot about butterflies, Kavya," says Laila Miss."That’sbecause they are my favourite insects," says Kavya."Whydo you love butterflies so much, Kavya?" asks Mary.Howcan Kavya choose just one thing? Sheloves how their bodies are sometimes spotted and sometimes striped.How they drink nectar with their long noses. How they spread pollen,which makes more flowers grow.
"Theyfly far, but wherever they land, they make new friends," Kavyasays, squeezing Mary’s hand. "They’re very small, but they’realso very brave.""Justlike you," Laila Miss says.Kavyasmiles a smile as wide as a butterfly’s wings.
Makea Butterfly Rest StationButterfliesin India migrate twice a year. Their journey is getting harder andharder because our forests and rivers are disappearing. Butterfliesdon’t have enough places to rest. Many get tired along the way. Oneway to help butterflies is to make safe spaces for them to stop andhave a good meal.
Here’show to make a butterfly rest station:Find	a flat vessel with high edges, like a thali or	a	plate.Butterflies	love bright colours. Paint the vessel red, yellow, or orange.Fill	the vessel with butterfly food. It’s easy to make! Mix four cups	of water with one cup of sugar.
Add pieces of over-ripe fruit. Butterflies love bananas, guavas, mangoes, papayas, and oranges.Keep the vessel out on your veranda, windowsill, or anywhere outside.Clean and refill the vessel every two to three days.To attract even more butterflies, plant flowers that butterflies love. You can plant verbena, geraniums, dahlias, or sunflowers. You don’t need a lot of space – you can plant them in pots on the ground, or keep them on windowsills.
I'm Maria.
This is my mother.
This is the baby.
This is my father.
This is my brother.
This is my sister.
This is my grandmother.
This is my grandfather.
This is my uncle.
This is my aunt.
This is my family.
Lerato na Khanyisa va ya elayiburari ya le kusuhi loko xikolo xi huma. Va ya eku tsaleni ka ntirhokaya wa vona.“Xana u endla yini namuntlha?” ku vutisa Khanyisa.“Ndzi lava ku lavisisa hi Siku ra Vavasati. Ndza tshembha i matimu yo lolohisa,” ku hlamula Lerato.
“Xana u tiyisile? A ya lolohisi!” ku vula Khanyisa.A ya emahlweni, “Mudyondzisi wa hina a hi nyikile asayinimente kotara leyi nga hundza. Na mina a ndzi ehleketa leswaku ya ta lolohisa. Tana ndzi ku byela leswi ndzi swi dyondzeke hi Siku ra Vavasati!”“Ndzi yingiserile!” ku hlamula Lerato.
“Malembe lama nga hundza ya va 1950, hi minkarhi ya ku sungula ka xihlawuhlawu,” ku sungula Khanyisa.“Mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu a wu lava leswaku vanhu vantima hinkwavo va khoma ‘mapasi’ kumbe buku yo titivisa.”“Mfumo wa xikoloni a wu sungurile sisitimi ya mapasi. Vantima a va nga fambafambi va tshunxekile.”
“Ku sukela hi 1912, vavasati a va ri na nsindziso hikokwalaho ka sisitimi ya mapasi eAfrika Dzonga.Hi 1913, ntlawa wa vavasati lowu a wu rhangeriwile hi Charlotte Maxeke, va hisile mapasi ya vona emahlweni ka tihofisi ta ka masipala. Va lwile na maphorisa!”
“Ku suka eka mfumo wa xikoloni ku ya eka mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu, swilo swi suke eka xiyimo xo tika kutani xi nyanya swinene,” ku vula Khanyisa.“Hatla u hlamusela leswaku ku humelele yini hi ti 9 Mhawuri 1956?” ku vula Lerato va ri karhi va fika elayiburari.“U fanele ku khensa vutivi bya mina bya matimu!” ku vula Khanyisa.
Elayiburari, va tshamile etafuleni ra le khoneni. Khanyisa a ya emahlweni a hlevetela.“Hi va 1950, ku tika ka xihlawuhlawu a ku endla vutomi byi tikela vanhu vantima.Vutomi a byi tika ngopfu-ngopfu eka vavasati va vantima. Kutani hi sindzisa!” ku vula Khanyisa, a tlakuserile rito ehenhla.
“Hi 1956, vavasati va Afrika Dzonga va kunguhatile machi leyikulu ya ku lwisana na nawu lowuntshwa wa mapasi lowu sunguriweke.Machi lowu a wu kunguhatiwile hiti 9 ta Mhawuri.Vavasati va vantima na valungu ku suka etikweni hinkwaro va yile ePitori eUnion Buildings va yela Machi ya Vavasati.”
“A kuri siku ro saseka! Kwalomu ka 20 000 wa vavasati va nghenerile machi.Lava a va rhangerile machi lowu a kuri Lillian Ngoyi, Sophia Williams, Helen Joseph, Rahima Moosa, na Bertha Gxowa. Un’wana na wun’wana a tiyingiserile na ku tiyimisela.“Va yisile magidigidi ya mapapila ya swivilelo eka mfumo. Mapapila lawa a ya kanetanaka na nawu wa mapasi.”
“Ku humelerile yini endzhaku ka swona?” ku vutisa Lerato.“Va yimile va rindza hulobyenkulu. Va yimile va miyerile ku ringana timinete ta30, va rindzile.Makumembirhi wa magidi wa vavasati, a swi tikile! A nga tanga ku tata hlangana na vona,” ku hlamula Khanyisa.“Matoya lawa!” ku hlamula Lerato.“Kutani, vavasati va sungurile ku yimbelela,” ku vula Khanyisa.
“Va ri karhi va yimile swin’we, vavasati va vona matimba ya marito ya vona, na matimba ya ku miyela ka vona,” ku hlamusela Khanyisa.“Va yimbelerile va ku,’ Wathinta abafazi, Wathint’imbokodo, Uzakufa!’‘Loko u faya wansati, swa fana na loko u faya tamba, u ta pyanyiwa!”
“Machi wa Vavasati i nsindziso wa nkoka eka matimu ya hina.Endzhaku ka ntshunxeko, ti9 ta Mhawuri ti vile holideyi ya mani na mani, siku leri hi hloniphaka vavasati no tlangela mintirho ya vona eka rixaka.Hi nga tlangela leswaku vavasati va na malunghelo ku tlula ekusunguleni,” ku heta Khanyisa.
Lerato a ku, “Mayana, u fanele u kumile A eka asayinimente yeleyo?!”“Ina, a ndzi hlohleteriwa hi vavasati lavo tala vo hlamarisa eka matimu ya hina. Ku tinyiketa ka vona na ku humelela ka vona swa hlohletela!” ku hlamula Khanyisa.A engetela,” Lerato, mina na wena hi nga fana na vavasati lava nkarhi lowu taka!”
In a far away town, there was a smart and expensive shoe shop. This is the town in which I was born.
Many people came to this shoe shop, but few could afford to buy the fancy footwear. One day, a rich man with big feet visited the shop.
He put his money on the shop counter. Then, with his hands in his pockets, he walked up and down looking at the shoes.
As he came closer, I held my breath and froze.He stretched out his hands and grabbed me.He sat down and put me on his feet.
He had huge feet, and the smell nearly suffocated me! I was packed into a box.We drove home, and he put me in a cupboard.
He wore me every day.I made him smart and he walked with confidence. I had a hard life. He was always lazy about washing his feet.
In return, sometimes I pinched him, making him limp.Eventually, I became old and broken, with scars and cracks.He put me outside, next to the rubbish bin.
Someone picked me up for recycling, and took me to a leather workshop.At the workshop I was made into a shiny new wallet!I began a new life.
I have many friends.....
My some friends are elder than me and....
some are younger than me......
And my some friends are aged like my grand father....
And some are children too....
And some friends are such who have a tail......
And some are such who doesn't have legs.....
And some are such who even fly.....
Ohhhhhh Even books are my friends......
But do you know who is my best friend.... Who??? Who???? Who????
My MOM!!!!!
Tulsa wishes she could visit a forest. Her teacher reads stories about tigers to the class. She loves to hear about forests and animals.
One day, her wish comes true! Khare Chacha, a senior forest official, invites Tulsa and her friends to visit a forest called Kanha Tiger Reserve. Tulsa and her friends can’t stop grinning. They will go to the forest for a whole day and a whole night!
It takes four hours by bus from the school to the forest. As soon as Tulsa gets down from the bus, a strong hand shakes her hand and then ruffles her hair. “Welcome to Kanha!” It is Khare Chacha.
Tulsa and her friends Rani, Mithu, and Dipti stay close to one another. “Sniff the air. It smells of trees and leaves!” says Mithu.“The air is clean like it has been washed with soap!” adds Rani.
It's almost sunset now. Khare Chacha and other forest officials tell them about the forest they will visit tomorrow. They play the sounds of animals and birds for the girls to hear and recognise.
PIAON! PIAON! “It’s a peacock!”OOW! OOW!“I know! It’s a barking deer.”KEEE! KEE!“That is the sound of crickets!”Next day, Tulsa wakes up at five in the morning. Brrr! It’s cold! Everyone bundles up in warm clothes. One by one, they get into the bus. “All around us there is tall grass covered in a thick blanket of fog,” Ranveer Uncle, the forest guide, tells them. Tulsa can feel the cold and pure air in her mouth. It tastes like mint leaves.
“Shhh!” Ranveer Uncle whispers. “There are two jackals right next to our bus.” Everyone listens carefully. They hear the rustling sound of the tall grass. Dried leaves crush under their feet, as the jackals run lightly into the dense forest.
Ranveer Uncle whispers again. “A big deer called sambar is standing on the left side of the road. The deer is brown and has big stem-like horns called antlers on its head.” Everyone focuses to their left. HAUNNNNK! HAUNNNK!  The sambar runs off. "Sounds like a very big horn!” says Tulsa. All the girls laugh.
Soon, the air becomes even cooler. “We are near a river now,” Ranveer Uncle says. Tulsa can hear the gurgling of the water. So many birds are calling from the trees.
FHWEEE! FHWEEE!“That one is whistling!” says Rashmi.“Yes Rashmi, that is the call of a thrush,” says Ranveer Uncle.KEEECH! KEECH!“And that screeching you hear is the call of the jungle babbler.”
Soft leaves fall from above. Baby monkeys are showering them with leaves! Tulsa picks up a leaf that falls on her. It smells fresh and pure, just like the forest.
The bus starts moving uphill. “Hold this creeper. See how it feels like a strong rope? The leaves are like cotton!” Everyone takes turns to hold the creeper. “This is the mahul,” says Ranveer Uncle. “The leaves are used to make small bowls.”
PIAONN! PIAONN!“Peacock to your right!” Ranveer Uncle is excited.
“Is he dancing?” asks Tulsa.“Yes!” Uncle says. “His feathers are shining in the winter sun and are sparking like gemstones.” “Beautiful,” says Tulsa.
By now everyone is very hungry. They stop at the forest camp for breakfast. There, Khare Chacha announces a surprise. “Some of our camp elephants are here. They won’t mind if you touch them gently.” Everyone starts squealing in delight. Soon Tulsa is led to the elephant, Tara.
The guide places her hand on Tara’s prickly stomach. Whoomp! Tulsa hears the sound of Tara’s feet moving. Tulsa can feel the powerful muscles under her hand. Trumpeting softly, Tara places her trunk in Tulsa’s hand, looking for food. Tulsa can’t stop smiling, as she feels the wet trunk. It's time to go back. On the way, they pass a gaur. “The gaur is chewing grass. The body is black but the bottoms of the legs are white. It looks like the gaur is wearing socks,” says Ranveer Uncle. Everyone laughs. Suddenly, the air is split by a call, deep and loud.
AUHN! The call comes again.“The tiger is very far,” explains Ranveer Uncle. “But he has probably seen you and wants you to know that.”
Sighing with happiness, Tulsa and her friends head out of the park. There are so many ways to experience the forest! They can't wait to come back to Kanha Tiger Reserve.
This is a real storyIn January 2017, the Last Wilderness Foundation in association with the Kanha Forest Department conducted a camp for 23 visually impaired students from the Ananya Manav Sai Samiti, Jabalpur. The students were taken on a safari and nature trail using their fabulous sensory skills to enjoy the forest.
About Last Wilderness FoundationThe Last Wilderness Foundation is an NGO that works in urban and rural areas with children to spread awareness about wildlife and biodiversity, and sensitise them towards conservation and the environment. For details, visit www.thelastwilderness.org.
Once upon a time, the animals decided to have a party. But it was not for all of them. It was only for the animals that had horns.
The rabbit was getting ready for the party. But then he found out that the party was not for everyone. It was just for animals  with horns.
The rabbit went somewhere and got some horns. Then he put them on his head and went to the party.
During the party the rabbit ate and drank and danced.
This made him tired and he fell down in the sun. But while the rabbit was sleeping, the horns fell off!
Then all the animals discovered that the rabbit was not the kind of animal they wanted. So they pulled his ears till they got bigger and bigger.
Then they ran away. And that's the reason why rabbits have big ears!
'Wov! What a lovely raincoat!' Mannu danced happily holding the shining red raincoat that his parents had bought for him.'Mamma, may I wear the raincoat now?' Manu asked his mother.Mamma said, 'No, my child. You can wear it when it rains. It should start raining soon. But as of now I don't see any signs of the rain.'
But, Monday was a bright sunny day, full of golden sunshine.Mannu looked out of the window every now and then and asked his mother,'Mamma, will it rain today?'Mamma  peeped out of the window and said, ' I don't think it will rain today. You cannot wear the raincoat today. People will laugh at you, if you do.'
On Tuesday also Mannu kept looking at the sky. And the raincoat was kept right next to him, ready to be used. But the sky was a nice blue and as bright as it was on Monday.Mannu was disappointed,'Mamma, when will I be able to use the raincoat?''There is just a single cloud in the sky today, and that too a white one. I don't think you will get a chance to wear the raincoat today.'Mamma said.
Wednesday again was a very hot sunny day.Mannu was getting worried, 'Mamma, why is it not raining yet?'He tried to put the raincoat on at home. But had to immediately take it off because he felt too hot in it.Mamma, in her eagerness to comfort him said, 'I think it will rain soon, probably by afternoon.'
On Thursday, there was the school picnic. Mannu was eager to show off the raincoat to his school buddies.'Mamma, shall I carry the raincoat to the picnic. What if it rains there?' Mannu asked.'Don't, my pet. It will not rain today. See those white clouds? And they are also so far away.' Mamma tried to comfort him.
And... at last  on Friday, the sky looked quite dark with black clouds. Mannu kept the raincoat ready at hand.'Mamma, it will rain today, right mamma?' Mannu asked excitedly. The peacock also seemed to think so and started dancing. The tortoise came out of it's hiding and looked up at the sky hoping perhaps to feel cooler after the hot summer.'I think so. Today the sky is full of black clouds.' Mamma smiled at Mannu's excitement and was happy for him.
On the Saturday morning there was a loud thunder.  And also lightening.'Mamma, it that not lightening? Now it will surely rain, right Mamma?' asked Manu.He ran out on the lawns and saw that a frog and a tortoise also had come out of their hiding.
And.. tip...tap...tip...tap... came down the raindrops!Mannu, loved the rains...raincoat or no raincoat.'Oh, it is raining; it is raining.' Thus shouting  Mannu ran out of the house and started  jumping and dancing in the rain. And he had the company of the frog who also seemed to be  waiting for the rains.
'Wait Mannu, wait.' Mamma ran after him with his raincoat in her hand. 'You forgot your raincoat!'But Mannu was very happy getting drenched in rains. The raincoat which he was holding close to himself all this time was all forgotten.
Once upon a time, there was a crocodile living at a river with her young ones.
The crocodile taught her young ones not to trust humans. This is because humans have brains.
One day a certain man crossed the river.
The man met the crocodile in the middle of the river and she attacked him.
Just as the crocodile was about to kill him, she remembered her father's words. He always told her that people have brains.
The man promised the crocodile that he could bring her human brains. So the crocodile released him.
The crocodile and her young ones are still waiting on the riverbank to receive those brains.
Crocodiles are angry to this day because they never received the brains that were promised to them.
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
﻿I lost my bat.    I cant find it anywhere.
I searched behind the door.    It's not there.
I checked on the shelf.   couldn't find it there.
﻿Searched under the cot.    It's not there either.
﻿checked in the box.     There is no trace of it.
Searched the whole loft.     couldn't find it there too.
﻿I searched for it everywhere.     couldn't find it anywhere.      There, It's in my sister's hand.
Shanti and Arun were good friends. They had so much fun together.They shared secrets in class. They ran races on the way home.She was always cheerful.
One day, Shanti came into the classroom slowly. Her head was bent. She looked sad. “Did someone scold you?” asked Arun.Shanti shook her head. She sat down and did not look up. She did not answer ‘Present!’ when Sona Miss called her name. Sona Miss called again, louder this time, “Shanti Kumar!” Shanti raised her hand.
“Do you have a sore throat?” her teacher asked her. Shanti shook her head.Her cheeks were red and it looked like she had a fever.“Are you feeling okay?” Sona Miss asked.Shanti nodded, still not daring to look up.
“Why does Shanti look so sad?”“Is your little brother okay?”“Is your puppy okay?”“Is your grandmother okay?”Shanti kept nodding her head to each of her friends. But she did not look up.
Arun wanted to make her smile. He had an idea! He took out something from his bag.As he ran to show it to Shanti, it slipped out of his hands. Shanti saw something flying towards her and she grabbed it.
It was a BIG, green, rubber frog!Shanti's eyes flew open. Then she opened her mouth to laugh.THEN Arun and her friends saw why she had not smiled or talked all day!Four of her front teeth had gone missing!
I have a new baby brother at home now, but all he does is cry, cry, cry... I can't talk to Mama, because he cries so loudly. When I try to talk to Papa, even on the phone, we  can't hear each other because Baby is crying, crying, crying...
When I come home from school, Mama is so tired. Sometimes when I try telling her about my football game or math homework, she drops off to sleep mid-way.
Papa's cousin has come to stay with us to help with Baby. But Laila Aunty, who used to play cricket in the garden with me before, is now too busy. And suddenly very strict. 'You can't touch Baby till you wash your hands with soap,' she tells me all the time.
When Baby is NOT crying, he looks so cute. But nobody lets me go close to him. 'Baby's sleeping. Don't disturb him,' they say. Or, 'You are too small to carry him. Wait till you're older.' I wonder how old I need to be before they let me play with my own brother.
It's not just Mama who's tired. Before Baby arrived, Ajji used to listen to all my news. And tell me lots and lots of stories. But one day I found her snoring at four o'clock in the evening. 'I'm tired, son...ask Thatha to read you a story today,' she said, half-asleep.
I found Thatha in front of the TV, fast asleep. I looked for Mama, but she too had slept off  beside Baby. I suddenly felt so lonely. Every one was asleep. And when they woke up, would have no time for me. Just when I turned to leave, I heard some soft laughter...
Baby was awake! And he was smiling up at me. With everyone asleep, there was no one to check if my hands were clean. Or remind me that I was not old enough to carry Baby. So I picked him up carefully and took him to my room. He lay on me for a little while...
...touching my face with his little fingers and making funny noises. Then he slept off again. Baby had not cried one bit with me. When Mama woke up a hour later, looking fresh and relaxed, she promised to read me my favourite story at night.
Now, nobody ever says, 'You're not old enough to do this...or that with Baby,' because when Baby is with me, he never cries.
One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi’s cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”Her stomach growled when the baby’s powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life.
One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter.What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.
Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong.Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed.She taught them to sing: “Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers.He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, “You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back.”Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi’s broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers.How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father’s face.
On her sixth birthday she went to school. “You must choose an English name,” said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. “Why do I need a new name?” she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: “Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna.” What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn’t mess with.When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, “You have a big job, my blessing.”At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.
Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride.Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, “You must apply, my clever friend.” “What is the prize?” asked Albertina, growing curious.“A scholarship to high school!” said Betty. “You must apply. You’ll win it, for sure.”
Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.The test began. Albertina’s fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. “Well done, Albertina!” said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. “Well done to Albertina for full marks,” he said, “but you are too old. The scholarship goes to…”Albertina tried not to cry. “That’s unfair,” shouted Betty, hopping with fury. “That wasn’t in the rules!” How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home.The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn’t like the story one bit either.
Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached.She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse’s silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground.
School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty’s back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons.In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? “But nuns earn no salary,” said Father Bernard. “Perhaps you should become a nurse? You’ll be paid while you study.”
Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse.Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.
Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina’s eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children.Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men’s Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina’s long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation.Max had his mother’s black button eyes and his father’s round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. “How rude you are!” she said, “trampling mud inside my home.”In the morning Albertina’s favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover.She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police.
She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, “Wathint’ abafazi; wathint’ imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!”Many hard years followed after Walter’s arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Oscar was a special young octopus. He lived with his fish friends in the ocean. His fish friends were not always nice to him.
Oscar's fish friends often teased him."Oscar is as blue as a bluebottle!"
The fish taunted when Oscar swam around the kelp."Oscar, you are as brown as the klingy kelp!"
Oscar lay on the sandy sea bottom and the fish jeered:"He is a white as foamy sea froth!"
"Oscar you are as green as slippery sea slime! Hahahahahahaha!"The fish would laugh at  his colour changes! Poor Oscar felt sad.
A pajama shark came along. All the fish panicked and flicked with fear. Oscar jettisoned into the jagged rocks and turned himself black to blend into the cracks!
The fish flicked and flurried all over while the shark snipped and snapped at them. But Oscar was safe hiding in the rocks. Nobody could see him!
Once the shark had left, the fish gathered. Oscar came out of his hiding place and the fish chorused: "Wow Oscar! We never knew that your ability to camouflage would come in handy! We are so sorry for teasing you."Oscar felt so proud. He finally knew what his special ability meant!
The next time the shark visited, Oscar helped shelter the fish in the slimy green seaweed, protecting them from the shark by turning green.
The shark was none the wiser and just swam away. After all, it just looked like nothing but green seaweed! Oscar felt so happy that he could help his friends.
Sonu, Monu and Rina set out to play.They saw a kitten.
She was looking at a big rat."Oh look!" shouted Sonu.
Rina saw a tiny ant going towards the big rat.
Suddenly, a very big shadow fell upon them all.
A very big eagle came down to the wall.A tiny ant, a small kitten,a big rat and a very big eagle in the same long street!
What would the three clever children do now?
They clapped their little hands!The eagle spread its big wings and flew away.
Rina made the ant climb onto a leaf. She left the leaf on the wall.The ant saw a grain of sugar. She picked it up and ran home.
The big rat picked up a half-eaten pakoda and went back into the drain.The small kitten said 'miaaww' and started licking her paw.
Monu got her some milk in a cup.The three kids played with her.
The very big eagle sitting on the tree blinked and flew far away.
Once, a rabbit thought to itself, "I have been eating raw carrots so far...
"Let me cook and eat it. "
"How do I cook?"
"Let me ask for help in this house"
But, there was a dog that started barking . He also chased the rabbit.
"Oh dear! What do I do now?" thought the rabbit.
He kept the carrots in the sun. The carrots didn't  cook.
He cooked the carrots in the fire. The carrots became too bitter!
"How do I cook and eat this? " Thought the rabbit furiously to himself.
He found a tortoise shell.
He gathered twigs.
He also found stones!
The rabbit lit the stove.
He also invited his friends to eat.
Everybody enjoyed eating the finely cooked carrots!
Hi! I am Neema. Just like you, I love to eat. Here are are some things that I eat: Dhokla , Panipuri and Jalebi.
Yum Yum! Where is this noise coming from? Oh! it's Neema who is eating.
Neema loves mangoes.
She loves all fruits.
It is raining. What is Neema doing? Let us see.
Oh! Neema is eating jamuns, pineapples and corn.Yummy! She says.
Oh! it is winter.Let us see what Neema is doing.
Oh! Neema is eating custard apple , beetroot and imlis
Neema loves to eat. Just like us.
Today is my first day of school. Mother held my hand and walking with me. "Now I have grown up," I say. "Come...come!"Mother held my hand tightly.
There are many children near the school.Some come by bus. Some come by car.Some come by rickshaw. Some come by bicycle and some come on foot, like me.
We reached to the gate.Mother left my hand.She stopped on gate. I have to go alone inside.Many unknown faces are around me.
I moved one step. I moved another step.  I looked behind. As I move forward, mother looks smaller. Would she disappeared? I ran to her. I don't think I've grown up. I hold her hand and say, "don't go".
All had gone inside. Only I was outside. Teacher came outside.She smiles after looking me. I also smiles. Mother says," Rani I will meet you here when you come out". I leave her hand. She waive her hand.
I ran inside. Mother would meet there on leave.
One special Friday Yusuf ’s father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woollen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf ’s eyes brighten when Papa says, “Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you.”
A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer’s Corner.Gulls circle the sky. “Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” they cry. “What will you bring back for Yusuf?”Papa rings his bell. “Wait and see what it will be!”
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf ’s grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa’s arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple.Papa sings as he works: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf ’s father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls. “What will you do to help the turtles?”Papa said, “We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one.”
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. Mother wants a new dress.“Don’t be silly,” says Ouma. “You’ll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There’s not so many fish left in the sea.”Yusuf holds Ouma’s hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. “What is for supper?”
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls.“There’s enough sea for everybody,” said Yusuf ’s father. He showed them the fishing licence that had been Oupa Salie’s. “Waves for all. Water for free.”
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What will Yusuf ’s father bring from the ocean?”
Yusuf’s father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf’s father untangles the nets, singing to the shark: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa’s finger.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What did you bring back for Yusuf?”As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. “A lucky shark tooth for my boy.”At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
