Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boywearing a beautifulshirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like that boy," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
Why is the sky blue?
It's not always blue.Is not it?
Why are the leaves green?
They are not always green.Is not it?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow.Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is the blood red?
There is iron in the blood.It makes it red.
Why is salt white?I do not know!
I am a tree and I am your friend.
I am a tree I give you life.
I am a tree I give you shelter.
I am a tree I give you shade.
I am a tree I give you food.
I am a tree I give you furniture.
I am a tree I give you education.
I am a tree I give you fire.
I am a tree and I am your friend.
Why is the baby crying?
I think she is hungry.
Why is the boy sad?
I think he is missing his father.
Why is the girl happy?
She has a new dress.
Why is the old man laughing?
He read a good joke.
Why is the lady smiling?
Her children are reading quietly.
What is this lady feeling?
I think she is feeling shy.
When I was five years old, Uncle Wanga gave me a wonderful present. It was a three-week-old puppy! The day Uncle Wanga brought the puppy home, I was very happy. I knew I had a friend.
After putting him down, Uncle turned to me and asked, "What name will you give him?" I looked at my puppy, and said, "Coco." Uncle was surprised. He asked, "Why do you call him Coco?" I said, "Because he looks like cocoa."
I asked my uncle if Coco was born alone. My uncle said that there was another puppy, exactly like Coco. I went to see Coco's brother.
When Coco saw his brother, he was very excited. The two of them put their heads together as if they were talking.
I asked my uncle if I could keep both Coco and his brother. "All right," he said. "But you must look after them." So every evening, I played with them and took them for exercise.
A few months later, Coco and his brother were big, strong and healthy. They were too big for me to look after on my own.
So I asked my uncle to take back Coco's brother. But when Coco was left alone, he looked very sad. It felt as if he was asking me, "Why did you do that?"
He stopped playing. Sometimes he refused to go for a walk with me. There were times when Coco ate very little. I was worried. I asked myself, "What can I do to help Coco?"
Behind the kitchen, dancing happily before me were Coco and his brother!
I was so happy that I did not know who to hug first, Coco or my uncle. I knew Coco would go back to his old self now that his brother was back. We would go running in the fields again!
In the busy city,  far away from a caring life at home,  lived a group of homeless boys. They welcomed each day just as it came. On one morning,  the boys were packing their mats after sleeping on cold pavements. To chase away the cold they lit a fire. Among the group of boys was Magozwe. He was the youngest.
When Magozwe's parents died,  he was only five years old. He went to live with his uncle. This man did not care about the child. He did not give Magozwe enough food. He made the boy do a lot of hard work.
If Magozwe complained or questioned,  his uncle beat him. When Magozwe asked if he could go to school,  his uncle beat him and said,  "You're too stupid to learn anything." After three years of this treatment Magozwe ran away from his uncle. He started living on the street.
Street life was difficult and most of the boys struggled daily just to get food. Sometimes they were arrested,  sometimes they were beaten. When they were sick,  there was no one to help. The boys survived from begging, and selling plastics and other recycling.
One day while Magozwe was looking through the dustbins,  he found an old tattered storybook. He cleaned the dirt from it and put it in his sack. Every day after that he would take out the book and look at the pictures. He did not know how to read the words.
The pictures told the story of a boy who grew up to be a pilot. Magozwe would daydream of being a pilot. Sometimes,  he imagined that he was the boy in the story.
It was cold and Magozwe was standing on the road begging. A man walked up to him. "Hello,  I'm Thomas. I work at a place where you can get something to eat," he said. Thomas pointed to a house nearby. "I hope you will go there to get some food?" he asked. Magozwe looked at the man,  and then at the house. "Maybe," he said,  and walked away.
Over the months that followed,  the homeless boys got used to seeing Thomas around. He liked to talk to people,  especially people living on the streets. Thomas listened to the stories of people's lives. He was patient and respectful. Some of the boys started going to the yellow house to get food.
Magozwe was sitting on the pavement looking at his picture book when Thomas sat down next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a pilot," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "I don't know,  I can't read," said Magozwe.
When they met,  Magozwe began to tell his own story to Thomas. It was the story of his uncle and why he ran away. Thomas didn't talk a lot,  and he didn't tell Magozwe what to do,  but he always listened carefully.
Around Magozwe's tenth birthday,  Thomas gave him a new storybook. It was a story about a village boy who grew up to be a famous soccer player. Thomas read that story to Magozwe many times,  until one day he said,  "I think it's time you went to school and learned to read. What do you think?" Thomas explained that he knew of a place where children could stay,  and go to school.
Magozwe thought about this new place,  and about going to school. What if his uncle was right and he was too stupid to learn anything? What if they beat him at this new place? He was afraid. "Maybe it is better to stay living on the street," he thought.
He shared his fears with Thomas. Over time the man reassured the boy that life could be better at the new place.
And so Magozwe moved into a house and shared the room with two other boys. There were ten children living at that house. Along with Auntie Cissy and her husband,  three dogs,  a cat,  and an old goat.
Magozwe started school and it was difficult. He had a lot to catch up. Sometimes he wanted to give up. But he thought about the pilot and the soccer player in the storybooks. Like them,  he did not give up.
Magozwe was sitting in the yard at the house where he stayed,  reading a storybook from school. Thomas came up and sat next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a teacher," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "His name is Magozwe," said Magozwe with a smile.
Chicken and Millipede were friends. But they were always competing. One day, they decided to play football to see who was the best player.
They went to the football field and started their game. Chicken was fast, but Millipede was faster. Chicken kicked far, but Millipede kicked further. Chicken started to feel angry.
They decided to play a penalty shoot-out. First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede dribbled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she lost. She was a very bad loser. Millipede started laughing because his friend was making such a fuss.
Chicken was so angry that she opened her beak wide and swallowed Millipede.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Mother Millipede asked, "Have you seen my child?" Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. "Help me mom!" cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked around and listened carefully. The voice came from inside the chicken.
Mother Millipede shouted, "Use your special power my child!" Millipedes can make a bad smell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill.
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed. And coughed. Millipede tasted disgusting!
Chicken coughed until she coughed out Millipede. Mother Millipede and her child crawled up a tree to hide.
From that time, all chickens and millipedes were enemies.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
Here is a jug of lemon juice.It is cold and sweet.There are 8 of us. How can we share the juice so that each one gets the same amount?
We can measure 8 equal parts on the jug.We can use a piece of string to measure.Cut the string to the same length as the height of the juice in the jug.
Fold the string into 8 equal parts.Mark the equal parts on the jug.Then we are ready to pour 8 equal amounts of juice.
We share the lemon juice.When it is finished, we want to drink more!How do you make lemon juice?
Lemon juicewater – 7 cupssugar – 2 cupsjuice from lemons – 1 cupYou will need to squeeze about 7 ripe lemons.Use a big jug or 2 litre bottle to mix ingredients.
Method1. Mix sugar and lemon juice with 2 cups of cold water. 2. Stir the jug, or shake the bottle, until sugar is dissolved.3. Mix in 5 cups of cold water.
Here is another way to write the recipe:1/10 juice of lemon2/10 sugar7/10 waterThe pure lemon juice is one part of the total amount of juice. How many parts is the total amount?
The picture shows half a lemon.How many parts in half a lemon?How many parts in a whole lemon?Each part is a fraction of the whole lemon.
He loves food, but he is too lazy to cook.
"Yes. Help me with stirring," says Rabbit. But Anansi is lazy.
Anansi ties some web around his leg and to Rabbit's pot.
"Monkeys, can I share your beans?" "Yes. Help us with chopping."
"Warthog, can I share your potatoes?" "Yes. Help me with preparing."
Soon,  each of Anansi's 8 legs is tied to a pot.
All 8 legs are being pulled! "Stop pulling!" cries Anansi.
Anansi's legs stretched! And so all spiders have long thin legs.
A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly, they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But, she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise, a dog opened the door and said, "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said, "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said, "Make the bed for  me!" Nozibele answered, "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed, or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said, "Nozibele, today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone, Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back, he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele, where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here, under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here, behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here, in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
Once upon a time there was a poor couple who had only one child, called Nonkungu. They loved her very much. When she was old enough,  her parents decided to send Nonkungu to stay with her rich Uncle Mtonyama. Nonkungu's mother made special clothes with ribbon,  buttons and beads. Then Nonkungu set off for her uncle's village.
On her journey,  Nonkungu came to a stream. She crossed the stream and met a girl wearing rags. The girl asked, "Where are you going?" Nonkungu replied, "I'm going to visit my Uncle Mtonyama." "Well,  Mtonyama is my uncle,  too! I am also on my way to visit him," said the girl. They set off together. After a while, the girl said to Nonkungu,  "Your clothes are lovely. Please let me try them on."
Nonkungu took off her clothes and gave them to the girl. When the girl took off her rags,  Nonkungu saw that she had a tail! Nonkungu was afraid. She realised that the girl was really an imbulu. They walked a little further,  and then Nonkungu asked,  "Please give me back my clothes and beads."
The imbulu answered,  "Let me wear them until we get to the next tree." She pointed to a tree on a hill nearby. When they reached the tree, Nonkungu asked, "Please give me back my clothes and beads." The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that field." She pointed to a field on the next hill.
At last they reached the field. Again Nonkungu asked the imbulu,  "Please give me back my clothes and my beads." The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that hut where the women are sitting." She pointed to a hut in the distance. But when they finally got near to the hut, the imbulu pushed Nonkungu back and ran ahead.
The imbulu said to the women at the hut, "Look at this girl wearing rags. She has been following me all day. I wish she would go away." The women turned to look at Nonkungu. She was so frightened that she ran and hid in the kraal. The imbulu went to Uncle Mtonyama's hut.
Mtonyama and his family welcomed the imbulu, who said she was their niece. Poor Nonkungu continued to hide away. She sang this song: "Oh misery me,  misery me. I was sent to stay with my Uncle Mtonyama. On the way I met an imbulu. She took my skirt and my beads. Oh misery me,  misery me."
One day,  Mtonyama's eldest son was walking in the field and heard the sad song. He didn't know who was singing,  but when he got home,  he told his father the words. Mtonyama went into the fields. He heard the song,  and looked until he found Nonkungu.
Nonkungu told her uncle everything that  had happened. Mtonyama took her back to the village and hid her in a hut. He knew what he was going to do to catch the imbulu. Mtonyama had heard that an imbulu's tail loves milk and that it can't go past milk without drinking some. So he told his men to dig a hole and fill it with sour milk.
Then Mtonyama called all the girls of the village to take part in a jumping competition. The imbulu was worried. She did not want to jump over the hole, she knew that her tail would be thirsty for the sour milk. So she went into a hut and tied her tail to her body as tightly as she could. Then she took her place with the other girls.
One girl after another jumped over the hole with the sour milk. At last it was the imbulu's turn. She tried to jump high over the hole,  but her tail broke loose. The imbulu's tail pulled her down,  down,  down into the sour milk.
As the imbulu struggled in the milk,  they quickly filled the hole with sand and buried her. That was the end of the imbulu. Nonkungu stayed happily with her uncle for a long,  long time.
Long, long ago, Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind were fighting.
The trouble was that Sun wanted to shine the whole day. Moon wanted to shine her light every day. Rain wanted to rain every day, and Wind wanted to blow every day. They didn't want to give each other a chance.
They decided to sit together and talk about it. Sun asked Moon, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Moon answered, "I shine at night so that the animals can hunt."
Moon asked Rain, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Rain answered, "I give the earth water so that the trees and plants can grow well. I give water for animals to drink."
Rain asked Wind, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Wind answered, "I sweep the earth clean. I scatter the rain over the whole earth."
Wind asked Sun, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Sun answered, "I give the earth light and warmth, so that animals and plants can live."
Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind listened carefully to each other.
Then Sun said, "It is true that each of us helps the earth in our own special way." "Yes", said Moon, "Not one of us is better than the others." "We can work together," said Rain. Wind said, "Then let us share the days." They all agreed.
And that is why you sometimes see the moon when the sun is shining. And sometimes you feel the wind when it is raining. Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind work very well together. They understand each other.
Do you like the sun, moon, the rain or the wind? Draw the one you like best.
The wind roars. It roars past our home.
The wind is powerful. It tears my kite from my hand.
I run after my kite. The wind blows me away from the kite!
The wind becomesa tornado. It carries my kite higher and higher.
The tornado swallows me up! I see nothing, I touch nothing.
Where is my kite now? Perhaps it is caught in a tree.
Perhaps my kite is still flying in the sky.
The wind finally dies down. I am still spinning.
When I stop spinning I look around. Where did the wind go?
I cannot see my kite anywhere. I cannot hear the wind anymore.
Perhaps tomorrowI will find my kite.
Now, I must go home, before the wind starts to roar again.
Rabbit was sleeping under an apple tree. An apple fell down from a branch.
A voice said, "Run Rabbit run!" She woke up quickly and ran away with great speed.
She met Chicken. "Why are you running?" asked Chicken. Rabbit replied, "I don't know. I just heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Chicken was frightened. She started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They met Dog. Dog asked, "Why are you running?" Chicken said, "I don't know. I just heard what Rabbit said, and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Dog was surprised about what she heard. She started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
They met Horse. Horse asked Dog, "Why are you running?" Dog said, "I don't know. I just heard what Chicken said, and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Horse started to run with the others.
They met Donkey. Donkey asked, "Why are you running?" Horse replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Dog said, and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
So Donkey starts running too.
They met Cow. Cow asked, "Why are you running?" Donkey replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Horse said, and she doesn't know. She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit  said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cow was worried and starte to run as well.
They met Cat. Cat asked, "Why are you running?" Cow replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Donkey said, and he doesn't know. He heard what Horse said and she doesn't know. She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cat started running with the other animals.
Then they met the boy riding the bicycle and he asked, "Why are you running?'' And the animals replied, "We don't know. We heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
The boy laughed and said, "An apple fell off the tree because of the wind. I'm the one who said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Namu and her brother are ready for school.
Namu carries her brother on her bicycle.
Their friends cheer for them as they ride into school.
While they are in the classroom,  a monkey arrives outside. The monkey rides away on Namu's bicycle!
The children chase the monkey.
The monkey leaves the bicycle under a tree.
The monkey swims to an island in the middle of the lake. He climbs high into a tree.
The monkey waves goodbye! The children wave back. Namu has her bicycle again.
Tortoise and Squirrel need money.
They make plates to sell at the market.
Tortoise sees a fight at the market.
Squirrel and Mole are fighting.
"Leave my friend alone!" shouts Tortoise.
Mole bites Tortoise on the nose.
His broken nose hurts.
Tortoise has a crooked nose because he rushed to fight.
I  wonder if  there's another me somewhere in the  world. THOUGHTS  FOR  YOUR  CHILD What do you think – is there another animal just like this one, somewhere in the world? There are five trees in this picture. If you take away the one tree on one side, how many trees are left on the other side?
Who looks  the same. THINK ABOUT THE FOLLOWINGWhen you look in a mirror, or a reflective surface like this  water, you see a reflection of your image. An image that has one side that looks like the reflection  of the other side is said to be symmetric. Most people's faces are very close to being symmetric. Do you see some things in your room that are symmetric?
And  talks  the  same. ACTIVITIESThis animal is listening to its echo across a canyon.  Have you ever been someplace where you can hear  an echo? Does your echo sound exactly like you, or is it different somehow?
who even has curls just like mine. ACTIVITIESThe hippo and the mouse both have a tail that is  curled, but they are certainly not the same as our friend. Describe some ways that those two animals are  different from our friend. Pick someone you know, and describe some ways that you are similar to them and different from them.
Someone with eyes and ears like mine. ACTIVITIESThis animal has 3 eyelashes on each side. How many eyelashes is that all together?
Who even laughs just like me. MORE ACTIVITIES TO DOCan you make sounds like some of the animals?  Can you neigh like a horse?Oink like a pig?Meow like a cat, or bray like a donkey?
Who can do what I can do.....THINGS YOUR CHILD DOESThey are so happy running along together. Do you feel happy when you are running freely in a big open  space like that? Do you prefer to run with someone or by yourself? They are running by some rocks. How many rocks are there? There are two big rocks near the path. If you take the big rocks away, how many rocks are left?
...and can't do what I can't do.DIFFICULT THINGS TO DOWhy are the animals having trouble peeling a banana?  Can you peel a banana easily? Are there things, such as fruit or packages, that you  have trouble opening?
I've looked and looked everywhere to find another  me. I went down to the park and looked behind the  trees. THINGS THAT YOUR CHILD WONDERS ABOUTWhat animal did he see when he looked behind the tree? Why was it another animal just like him? Is that what he was looking for?
I looked up and down, left and right and all around.WHAT DOES YOUR CHILD THINK?That first picture is just silly. How would that animal  ever climb to the top of a tree? Do you think the bird is surprised to see it there?
I looked at every animal I found.CAN YOUR CHILD ADD NUMBERS?There are three animals on one side of the pond and  one more on the other side.  If you put them all together, how many animals are there at the pond? Similarly, if you remove the one animal on one side of the pond from the group of four animals that are  at the pond, how many animals are left?The two facts – that 3 + 1 = 4 and 4  – 1 =  3 – are tied together and are called a math fact family.
I couldn't find anywhere, anybody who looked just like me.WHAT DOES YOUR CHILD THINK?Do you think his shadow temporarily fooled him into thinking that there was another animal just like him?Does your shadow look like you? Have you ever seen someone's shadow and thought  that the shadow was really a person?
There's only one me in the world! I am very special you see.DIFFERENCES IN ANIMALSHow many animals can you count in this picture?Describe some of the ways that each one of them is different from our friend.
But I am not the only special one. There is only one of you too!EACH PERSON IS UNIQUEDo you know someone who is very similar to you? Perhaps they are the same age or the same height,  or perhaps their hair is similar to yours.  Despite the similarities, they are probably not exactly the same as you.
Malela village was surrounded by hills. Many snakes lived in the forest on those hills. The biggest snake was called python by the villagers. Python scared many people. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, three sisters, Mutale, Mutinta and Mabvuto went to the forest to fetch firewood. The girls' grandmother warned, "Beware of Python the big snake. Do not take anything from the forest except the wood."  Only Ajoh did not pay attention to her grandmother.
The girls packed milk, bananas, sweet potatoes and water. They took ropes for tying firewood and a sharp dagga for chopping the wood. Then they left for the forest.
On the way, the sisters chatted and laughed. Suddenly,  Mutale, the eldest of them, said, "Be quiet. We are coming to where Unyalego the snake lives."
Mabvuto called to the others, "Look, here are Python's golden teeth. Let us take them."  Mutale reminded them, "Don't forget grandmother's warning. We must not take anything from the forest except firewood."
Mutinta said, "I don't trust grandmother. She said that to stop us having what we want. I want the golden teeth." Her sisters were worried, but Mutinta did not care.
At that moment Python came looking for his golden teeth. He was furious when he could not find the teeth. Then python heard the girls chatting and laughing. He hid under a rock next to the road where the girls would pass on their way back.
The sisters were going home carrying their firewood. Suddenly, they heard, "Hssssss!" There was Python with his mouth wide open, ready to bite. The girls were terrified.
Python asked the girls, "Who took my golden teeth?" No one answered. Python decided to test the girls. "Whoever is innocent,  will be able to sing well. She will go home with her wood. But the guilty one will sing badly. And I will eat her!"
Mutale started to sing with a clear voice, "It was not me,  it was not me who took the teeth. The one who took is still behind." Then Mabvuto sang the song. She also sang well.
Lastly, it was Mutinta's turn. She was scared. She started singing. It  sounded terrible and the words were wrong. Python shouted, "Can't you sing properly like the others?" Python knew that Mutinta took his golden teeth.
Python opened his huge jaws and swallowed Mutinta. Her sisters ran back to the village. They told everyone the story of what happened. "I warned her, if only she had listened," the girls' grandmother said sadly.
Long long ago when the earth was new, great mountains covered the world like a blanket, and tall trees spiked the sky.
In this world, there was a deep dark pool, silent and cold.
At the bottom of this pool were two snakes. One had thick strongly patterned coils, and the other was smaller and more delicate.
Then one day, there was a great storm. A flash of lightning pierced right to the bottom of the pool. The waters parted for a moment. The snakes saw the earth above, full of colours and shapes and feathered creatures. When the waters closed again, the snakes could not forget the beauty they had seen.
"We cannot stay in this dark cold pool any longer," they said to each other. "Let us go up and see the earth above." "How will we live on earth?" said the smaller snake. "Will we crawl on our bellies?"
"The birds of the air will not laugh at us for being so low," said her friend. "We will not crawl, we will walk!" Very slowly the snakes uncoiled themselves. Close together they began to swim up, up, to the light above.
And as they reached the surface of the water, a strange thing happened. The tips of their tails split into two. They grew limbs with feet and toes. From just beneath their heads grew two arms with hands and fingers.
They were no longer snakes, but Man and Woman.
"We will make our home in the hills," said Woman. "Each morning we will see the sun rise and feel it warm on our backs." "We will look after the grass and the trees," said Man. "And be friends with Bird and Beast."
"Come," said First Man. "I will," said First Woman. And they walked out together into their new world.
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie, Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can seethe huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing."There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone, I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes, 12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says."I like counting in 4s," says Duksie, "it's quicker." "I'm goingto count in 3s, just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look, there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did youpack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asksthe children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side, to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see, how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself, "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen andget a surprise forthe children!"
Back at the farm, Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them, "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what shemight bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of apples falls onto the table. "See, I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children, "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. They count: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 1 apple left over. Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next, they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted. "Yay!" shout the children."
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
"I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf," cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
"If I do not have water, I will die," cried Little Ant. "I must go to the river I heard about."
"The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away," warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. "I will die if I don't drink some water."
So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
"Help me someone. Help me please!" he called.
"Quick, climb on," said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
"I will stay here until I can thank the dove," decided Little Ant. "I will wait until she comes back to drink."
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
"There is a big white dove that comes here to drink," said one boy.
"I cannot let the boys kill White Dove," thought Little Ant. "But I am so tiny, what can I do?"
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
Little Ant had an idea.
Little Ant jumped onto one boy's foot. He bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. "Ouch!" he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Mother, Father and Laraba are talking about how to stay healthy.
Laraba asked at school, "Why must we wash our hands?"
Teacher said, "Our hands have germs on them, but you can't see germs."
"Germs are very tiny. We need a microscope to see them."
Laraba looked through the microscope.She saw the germs from her hand.
"Viruses and bacteria are types of germs.Germs can make us sick."
"Washing hands stops viruses and bacteria from spreading," said Teacher.
Father is making a tool for washing hands.
Laraba asks, "How does this tool work?"
"The wooden step tilts the container, and water flows out."
"Wash with soap and water. Slowly count to 20 while you wash."
"Clever Dad! Now, can you greet with your elbow?"
Selemeng loves cats. There are many cats at her house.
Selemeng has one black cat. This cat eats a lot of meat.
Selemeng has one fat cat. This cat eats everything.
Cat number three, runs up a tree. This cat gets stuck in the tree.
Selemeng climbs the tree. She gets stuck with cat three. Selemeng's mother has to help them get down.
Selemeng has two lazy cats. They lie outside in the sun all day.
Selemeng has three busy cats. They catch rats in the kitchen at night.
Selemeng has one dog. His name is Lirafi. Lirafi has no friends. He is sad.
Selemeng's cats do not like Lirafi. They chase him out of the house. Lirafi runs away.
Selemeng finds Lirafi and brings him home. The cats are not happy. They do not want to see Lirafi again.
How many cats does Selemeng have? She has eight cats.
How many dogs does Selemeng have? She has one dog. Where is Lirafi now?
How many cats do you have at home?How many dogs do you have at home?
Ape meets Crocodile by the lake.
"Where do you live?" asks Ape,  "In the lake," says Crocodile.
"Where do you live?" asks Crocodile. "In the trees," says Ape.
"Can you swim?" asks Crocodile.
"I cannot swim," says Ape. "I can teach you."
"We are friends. Do not be afraid," says Crocodile.
"Ape,  my uncle is sick. He needs meat," says Crocodile.
Ape is very afraid. Will Crocodile eat her?
Ape wants to escape from Crocodile.
Ape has an idea.
"I will give you my heart for him," Ape promises.
"My heart is in a tree on the land," says Ape.
"Will you fetch your heart?" asks Crocodile. "Yes," says Ape.
Crocodile swims back to the land. Ape runs to the trees.
"You are not my friend. You lied!" says Crocodile.
"We are not friends. You want to eat me!" says Ape.
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
“I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf,” cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
“If I do not have water, I will die,” cried Little Ant. “I must go to the river I heard about.”
“The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away,” warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. “I will die if I don't drink some water.” So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
“Help me someone. Help me please!” he called.
“Quick, climb on,” said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
“I will stay here until I can thank the dove,” decided Little Ant. “I will wait until she comes back to drink.”
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
“There is a big white dove that comes here to drink,” said one boy. “We will have it for supper tonight.”
“I cannot let the boys kill White Dove,” thought Little Ant. “But I am so tiny, what can I do?”
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
Little Ant had an idea.
He jumped onto one boy's foot. Little Ant bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. “Ouch!” he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Ball.
My ball.
My red ball.
My big red ball.
I kick.
I kick my ball.
I kick my red ball.
I kick my red ball hard!
Where?
Where is my ball?
Where is my ball now?
Where is my red ball now?
It is up.
It is high up.
It is high up in the sky.
It is high up in the sky. It is over the moon. It is gone!
My little brother sleeps late. I wake early,  because I am great!
I am the one who lets in the sun.
"You're my morning star," says Ma.
I wash myself every day,  I don't need any help.
I don't mind cold water, or the blue soap that washes clothes.
Ma reminds,  "Don't forget your teeth." I reply,  "Never,  not me!"
After washing,  I greet Grandpa and Auntie. I wish them a good day.
Then I dress myself.  "I'm big now, Ma," I say.
I can close my buttons and buckle my shoes.
I make sure my brother knows all the school news.
In class I do my best in every way.
I do all these good things every day. But the thing I like most,  is to play and play!
I love my teacher.
She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She has braided her hair so nicely.
She has put colourful beads in her hair.
Her beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, please would you braid my hair like my teacher's?
When I am older I will put beads in my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
Once upon a time, there lived two sisters, Nelima and Nambuya. Their parents were dead. They lived on bare land. There was neither rain nor crops. Whoever wanted food had to go a long distance to find it.
Nelima was a humble, quiet and helpful girl. Her sister Nambuya was proud and did not listen to advice. She did not care about other people.
One day, the two sisters had nothing to eat. They would have to look for food. So Nelima and Nambuya went off in different directions.
Meanwhile, there lived an old woman called Netasile. She was believed to be a giver of riches. Netasile had leprosy and her body was full of sores.
Nambuya came across Netasile. Netasile called the Nambuya, "My daughter, how are you? Where do you come from? Where are you going?"
Nambuya answered all the questions. Then the Netasile said, "Come help me to go to my house and I will tell you what to do."
Nambuya was rude to the woman. She said, "I would rather die than touch those sores of yours." Netasile kept quiet and wished Nambuya a safe journey.
Nambuya walked for a long time. She reached a place where there were snakes, millipedes, caterpillars and other insects. She was very tired and weak from hunger. When she sat down to rest, she fell asleep. The insects began to bite her.
On her journey, Nelima came to the same old woman. She was happy to see Netasile, who was the first person she met since starting her journey. Netasile asked the same questions as she asked Nambuya.
Nelima agreed to help Netasile. "You have done what others failed to do," said the old woman. She told Nelima to go back home. There she would find everything she wanted.
Nelima was very grateful and thanked the old woman. She ran back home and found a new house with everything in it, and a lot of food. She was now rich.
But Nelima mourned the loss of her sister, Nambuya. She said to herself, "One who did not listen to advice ended up in an elephant's mouth."
King Leopard was getting old. How will he choose the next king?
King Leopard called animals to the party. He would announce his plan.
After the party, King Leopard spoke. The animals listened.
He said, "A contest will decided the next king."
One who counts to ten before the spear falls, will be king.
Elephant pushed everyone aside, "I'm the biggest. I should be king."
Elephant only counted up to four. The spear fell.
Warthog pushed everyone saying, "I'm the strongest. I should be king."
Warthog counted up to six and the spear fell. He left.
Everyone said, "Big Elephant and Warthog failed. Who can win?"
Ape counted, "One! Two! Three! Four! Five! Six! Seven!" He cried.
King Leopard said, "Ape, you only get one chance." Ape left.
Some animals started leaving. Then, Little Antelope said, "Let me try."
King Leopard shouted, "Give Antelope a chance. Let her try."
Antelope said, "Five and five is ten." The spear fell down.
The contest showed the smartest animal. Antelope was queen after leopard.
I decided to name them Royalty and Blackie.
Royalty was brown and like a queen. Blackie was a lovely black dog with long hair.
I used to walk them everyday when I came from school.
Sometimes I would bath them by myself. Royalty would always run away!
Then, we moved and went to a flat. They didn't allow dogs there.
I found that Blackie was lost, and Royalty was lonely.  I felt very bad in my heart.
All of us went to the Dasara fair.
Papa bought Chintu fancy glasses. Mother bought me a bright blue cap. The baby got sugar candy.
On the way home, a very strong wind came.It blew my cap away.
My cap got stuck on a branch of the old Pipal tree.
I cried a lot. And I did not eat my dinner.
Later that night, the moon came up.It looked at my cap on the old Pipal tree.
It tried on my cap. The moon smiled happily. I had to smile too.
After school the next day, my mother gave me a shiny new red cap. “The moon sent it,” she said.
That night, both the moon and I wore our caps and smiled. We were happy.
Do you think the sun needs a hat?
Guess which cap I am wearing today!
My sister's dress is too big for me!
My brother's jersey is also too big for me.
My bag is big. But not too big!
This old belt is too small for me.
This is my doll's hat.
My socks are the right size.But the wrong colour!
These are my new shoes.
They fit me very well.
Look at the animals.
The cow says, "Moo."
The goat says, "Meh,  meh."
The horse says, "Neigh."
The pig says, "Grunt."
The chicken says, "Cluck."
The dog says, "Woof."
The farmer says, "Shhh!"
His hoe* was too short.* Long gardening tool.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was tooshort.
His bicycle was short too.
This man was too tall!
He made a hoe with a very long handle.
He made very tall  door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for there happily.
Dad loves porridge.
I love cornflakes.
Dad loves coffee.
I love milk.
Dad loves apples.
I love oranges.
Dad loves bread. I love toasted bread.
We both love fat cakes (vetkoek).
Once upon a time on a little farm near a little village.
There lived a little chicken called Daisy.
"When I grow up, I want to fly high, high into the sky," Daisy said.
But all the other chickens laughed at her.
"You are so weird," they said. "We won't play with you anymore."
"Daisy, we can all flap our wings but it's very difficult for chickens to fly," Mama told her.
Daisy wouldn't give up. Every day she practised by herself, flapping her wings. Flap, flap, flap, she would flap her wings but she couldn't lift off the ground.
While she practised, she imagined herself flying high into the sky and looking at the chickens below. She imagined herself flying past the sparrows and past the swallows. "Wow!" The birds would say. "A chicken that can fly!"
So Flap, flap, flap, every day Daisy would flap her wings.
She would lift off the ground but fall down again.
"I'm never going to fly!" Daisy cried to Mama. "The others are right.""Daisy, you are different from the other chickens. They don't want to fly but you do! You can do it, " Mama said.
The following day Daisy climbed to the top of the chicken coop and flap, flap, flap, she flapped her wings. She flew into the air and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and...
BAM!The other chickens laughed out loud."Ha ha ha! We told you! Chickens can't fly!"
But the next day Daisy climbed even higher, right up to the top of the hut. Flap, flap, flap, Daisy flapped her wings.
She flew into the air andflapped her wings andflapped her wings andflapped her wings and...
She kept flying! The wind beneath her wings grew stronger and she flew higher and higher! The sparrows and the swallows said, "Amazing! A flying chicken!"
And the other chickens wanted to be just like her.
They said, "Oh Daisy, you're amazing!"
There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."
But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!
Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."
Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"
Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."
"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."
Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."
So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.
The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."
The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dusty car.
Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." "My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.
From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. And he tried his best not to get angry with her.Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided it wasn't worth the price to get angry and break things.
The rains did not come. The land was very dry.
This monkey left home to look for water and food.
She walked over hills and valleys.
She came to a place named Tirkol.
Monkey was very happy in this place.
She ate fruit and got fat. But she missed her friends.
So Monkey made the long journey home.
The other monkeys were joyful to see her.
"Where is this wonderful place with fruit?" they asked her.
"I will take you there," said Monkey.
The other monkeys loved Tirkol. They decided to stay there forever.
But the monkeys from Tirkol were worried.
"These new monkeys will eat all our fruit," they said.
The Tirkol monkeys went to attack the new monkeys.
"Why fight?" asked an elder. "There is enough fruit for all!"
This was true. So the monkeys decided to live together peacefully.
“Re botšeng tša bophelo bja lena bonnyaneng,” gwa botšiša Lebo.Moh. Asnath a re, “Ke belegwe ka 1979 kua Profenseng ya Limpopo, gola Afrika Borwa.Ge re gola re be re sena pompi tša meetse ka magaeng gape re šomiša kerese go dira mošomo wa sekolo.”
“Bjale lerato la go fofiša difofane le thomile neng?” gwa botšiša Lebo.“Taba yeo e be e le toro fela. Ge ke nale mengwaga ye 13, ka thoma go ba le kgahlego.Kua sekolong ka thoma go bala dimakasini tša bofofiši.Ya ba ge ke thomile,” gwa gopola Asnath.
“Bjale taba yeo ya gola bjang?” gwa botšiša Lebo a ngwala fase.“Ke be ke fela ke ipotšiša gore naa go tla bjang gore sefofane, selo se se golo, sa boima, se kgone go fofa moyeng.Ke nyaka gape go tseba gore di fofa bjang,” gwa fetola Moh. Asnath.
“Naa motho o swanetše go dira dithuto dife go ba mofofiši?” gwa botšiša Lebo.Moh, Asnath a fetola a re, “Dipalo, Saense le Boenjenere.Morago wa ithuta go fofiša sefofane lebaka le letelele pele o ka hwetša lengwalo la go ba mofofiši wa difofane.”
Lebo a re, “Naa dithuto tšeo di thuša ka eng mošomong wa lena?”Moh. Asnath a re, “Dipalo di thuša ge o hlakantšha dinomoro ka sefofaneng ge se fofa.Ka Enjenere o tseba bokagare bja sefofane go kwešiša le gore bo šoma bjang.”
“Hee, bjale ge le fofa la mathomo le be le ikwa bjang? Le be le sa tšhoga?” a realo Lebo.Moh. Asnath a re, “Hei Lebo! Ke tšere matšatši ke sellega nako ge ke fofa. Efela ka se nyame mooko.Ga bjale ke fofela nageng di šele, ke ithuta ditšo tša go fapafapana.”
“Ke tshepa le ipshina ka seo! Bjale sefofane sona se fofa bjang?” a realo Lebo.Moh. Asnath a hlaloša a re, “Moya o fofa diphegong wa kukela sefofane godimo. Maatla a go tšwa enjeneng a se iša pele, gomme sa fofa.”
“Naa mošomong wo le kopane le mathata afe?” gwa botšiša Lebo.“Ke ile ka botšwa gore ke nna yo mokopana. Ba re mosadi a ka se šome mošomo wa banna. Gape ba re dithuto tšaka ga se tša maleba tša bofofiši.”
Lebo a botšiša a re, “Naa mathata ao le a fentše bjang?”“Ke ile ka lwantšha molao wa go gana batho ba seemo sa ka. Ka thoma fase dithuto gomme ka netefatša go hwetša meputso ya godimo kudu.Ka bontšha bokgoni bja basadi,” a fetola Asnath.
Lebo a dumela gomme Asnath a tšwela pele. “Ke ithutile gore ge o šetša, o ka se palelwe.“Ke ithutile gore ge o na le maikemišetšo o ka se palelwe ke selo. Le gore o se theeletše batho ba gore o ka se kgone. Gape gore basadi ba ka dira sengwe le sengwe sa go dirwa ke banna,” gwa fetola Moh. Asnath.“Ke nnete seo!” a realo Lebo.
“Naa le ikgantšha ka eng?” gwa botšiša Lebo.Moh. Asnath a re, “Ke be ke nale mengwaga ye masomepedipedi fela ge ke fihlelela go ba mosadi wa mothomoso wa mathomo wa go fofiša difofane.Gape ke be ke le sehlopheng sa mathomo sa go fofiša sefofane re le basadi fela.Ga bjale ke hlohleletša basetsana go latela dithuto tša Saense.
Lebo a fetša ka gore, “Ke rata go le leboga ge le kgonne go boledišana le nna.Ge le kgona go bontšha rena baswa gore ka maikemišetšo, motho a ka fofela godimo!”Moh. Asnath a myemyela a re, “Le nna ke thabetše go boledišana le wena, Lebo. Thobela.
Bling was passionate about soccer. When talking about the game, he often said, "Soccer is life."
Bling was one of Coach Tsepo's best players.The coach was proud of his team. Many wanted to join them.
An important match was coming. The team practiced every day.Everyone was excited about the big game!
The coach from the opposing team was a jealous man.He was very envious of Coach Tsepo's success.
Bling got off to a hot start in the match. He was running to score.
He missed the shot, and fell down!"Bling?" shouted the crowd"Bling?" pleaded Coach Tsepo.
"Nothing will keep me down!" said Bling to himself."Soccer is life."He got up, and played until the end.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
“Ndzi lava ku mi hlamusela hi mungjhiniyara loyi a nga na ndhuma yo tumbuluxa. Munhu loyi u tswariwe eVondwe,” ku hlamusela Mudyondzisi Marry.“Vondwe hi le kwihi ka Mudyondzisi?” ku vutisa Lulama.“Hi le matikoxikaya ya le ka xa xifundzakulu xa Limpopo,” ku hlamula Mudyondzisi.
“Mulalo Doyoyo u tswariwile hi siku ra 13 Mhawuri 1970. A mi ri kwihi hi 1970?” ku vutisa Mudyondzisi Marry.“Mudyondzisi, a hi nga ri kona hi 1970,” ku hlamula Jack hi ku hleka.“Mulalo u sungule eVondwe hi 1977,” i mudyondzisi a yaka emahlweni.
“Loko a nghena eMbilwi, u rhandzile dyondzi ya sayense na vunjhiniyara,” ku hlamusela Mudyondzisi Marry.“Xana vunjhiniyara i yini?” ku vutisa mudyondzisi.“I sayense na thekinoloj swi hlanganile,” ku hlamula Nkoka.“I ku endla michini, miako na swilo swin’wana,” ku hlamula Kulani.
“Hinkwenu mi vulavula ntiyiso. Vanjhiniyara va tumbuluxa na ku endla michini, switirhisiwa na miako. Va tirhisa sayense na thekinoloji,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.“Endzhaku ko heta xikolo xa sekondari, Mulalo u ve a kuma nseketelo wa timali ku ya dyondza Vunjhiniyara eYunivhesiti ya Kapa,” Mudyondzisi u ya emahlweni.
“Loko a ha ri eyunivhesiti, Mualo u simeka nhlangano wa Temescial.Temescial swi yimele ‘Thekinoloji, vutshunguri na sayense swa hinkwavo.’Nhlangano wu hlohlotela vana eka dyondzo ya sayense, thekinoloji, vunghiniyara na matematiki.Hi ta kuma swo tala hi mhaka leyi.”
“Loko a heta digiri ya yena yo sungula, Mulalo u yile eAmerika. U dyondzile na ku dyondzisa kwale.U dyondzisile Sayense na Matematiki. Xana Matematiki I yini?” ku vutisa Mudyondzisi Marry.“I dyondzo ya tinhlayo, swivumbeko na tipatironi,” ku hlamula Akani.
“Hi swona sweswo wena Akani,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.Ivi a ya emahlweni na xitori xa yena.“Mulalo u endle vudokodela. Hi yona digiri ya le henhla leyi, PhD. Endzhaku ka yona u vuriwa dokodela. I mutikoti wa swa vunjhiniyara.”
“Sweswi ndzi nga si mu byela hileswi Mulalo a swi tumbuluxeke, yimani ndzi mi byela hi xitirhisiwa xo aka lexi vuriwaka semende,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.“Semende yi na maribye ma layimi lama tirhisiwaka eka miako.Ribye leri ri ceriwa emigodini, ri siriwa ri va swiphemu switsongo ivi ri hisiwa ku endla semende.”
“Vadyondzi, Mulalo u tumbuluxile xitirhisiwa xo aka lexi nga riki na maribye. Xi endliwe hi nkuma na malakatsa man’wana.Leswi swi vula leswaku swa koteka ku endla semende u nga tirhisi ribye ra layimi kusuka ehansi. Mbangu a wu vaviseki.”
“Mulalo u tlhele a tumbuluxa muchini wo endla switina lowu nga dyiki mati no tirhisa gezi ro tala. Phela mati ma kala!”“A hi fanelangi ku siya tipompi ti nga pfariwangi,” ku vula Jack.“Hi swona wena Jack. I vutihlamuleri bya hina ku hlayisa mati,” ku engetela Lulama.
“Se ndzi heta xitori xa mina hi xithuthuthu xa hayidirojeni. Mulalo u rhandza ku hlohlotela vana. Xithuthuthu xi thyiwile Ahifambeni. Mulalo u tumbuluxile xithuthuthu lexi na valavisisi van’wana,” ku vula Mudyondzisi.“Xithuthuthu xa hayidirojeni, swa tsakisa leswi! ku vula Kulani.”“Ahifambeni!” ku vula Nkoka.
“Ina, A hi fambeni hi ya endla vunjhiniyara hi tumbuluxa swilo swa kahle!” ku vula Kulani.“A hi tirhiseni Sayense na Thekinoloji ku ololoxa swiphiqo na ku tiphina!” ku vula Nkoka.“Ndza swi tiva leswaku xitori xa Mulalo xi ta mi hlohlotela!” ku vula Mudyondzisi Marry a karhi a n’wayitela.
It had been raining for days, and everyone was grumpy. Everyone except Sizwe, who woke up with a smile every morning.“Yoh! Sizwe! That smile is magic!” said Gogo.“Is it for me?”Sizwe clapped his hand over his mouth.“But it’s MY smile, Gogo,” he whispered.
His mother laughed. “Sizwe! A smile is something you can give away without losing it. Look!”She lifted him up to the mirror. There was his smile, just as bright as before.
It was time to go out. Mama buttoned up Sizwe’s raincoat, and off they went, through the rain, to the library.Down the street, Sizwe’s best friend Zanele stood at the window of her house, looking sadly at the rain.Sizwe felt his smile creeping, creeping up. Before he knew it, his smile LEAPT out, and flew across the garden to Zanele.
Zanele held on tightly to the smile – it was far too precious to let it get away.As Sizwe walked away to the library, Zanele’s doorbell rang. It was the postman, with a letter from her favourite cousin.Zanele was so happy, that the smile bounced up, and beamed out at the postman.“Thank you, Mister Postman!” she said.
Zanele’s smile was the brightest thing the postman had seen all morning. It kept him warm as he trudged off through the rain.He came to a big house. Inside the gate, a dog was spinning around in circles, barking, barking, barking. He was so silly, that the postman couldn’t help smiling.The smile bounced through the gate with a glitter of glee.
The dog stopped barking. He pricked up his ears and wagged his tail. Then he turned and ran back to the house with the precious, warm smile.A bent old man opened the door. “Oh, no! You can’t come inside. You’re all wet!” he told the dog. But right away, the smile beamed up at the old man.
The old man stood a little straighter. “Eish,” he said, “Who cares if it’s raining? Let’s go for a walk, boy!” And off they went, splashing in the puddles.There, at the zebra crossing, stood grumpy Mrs Makabela, the traffic cop. She looked cold, and wet, and miserable.The old man knew just what to do. “Morning, Mrs Makabela!” he called, and smiled his biggest, brightest smile.But Mrs Makabela… did not smile back.
Standing in the rain for days can make a face sad, sad, sad.But a smile is a magical thing and, by now, the smile was so strong, and so bright, that it was very hard to keep inside.It didn’t work right away, but bit by tiny bit, it began to creep out until, at last…!A great, big smile lit up Mrs Makabela’s face!The school bell rang, and children ran to cross the road. Mrs Makabela put up her sign, and smiled, and smiled, at each and every child.
The children smiled at their moms and dads, and their gogos and tatas and brothers and sisters. They smiled at the bus driver and the greengrocer, and Mrs Makau, who went off to smile at her husband, who smiled at the mayor...The smiles leapt and rolled and beamed and gleamed until EVERYONE was smiling and giggling and laughing out loud in the rain.
In the library, everything was quiet except for the sound of the rain.“It’s time to go,” said Sizwe’s mother, closingher book.“Aw, mom!” said Sizwe, who had run out of smiles.
But as they stepped out into the street…WHAT A SIGHT!Everyone in town was there!Everyone!And they were ALL smiling!
The smiles bounced around and beamed at Sizwe. They warmed him, and tickled him, and crept up, up, up from his toes… to the TOP of his head. He was so full of happiness that the smile burst out, brilliant and beaming bright.And something changed. The dark, gloomy, rainy afternoon didn’t seem so dark anymore.Could it be…? YES!The clouds parted, and the warm sun shone down on them, with the biggest, brightest, most brilliant smile of all.
"Mom," calls Lebo. "Come and look. These clothes are all too small for me!" "Let me see," says Mom.
"Look at my skirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes,  it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your skirt."
"Look at my jeans. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jeans."
"Look at my T-shirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your T-shirt."
"Look at my jersey. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jersey."
"Look at my raincoat. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your raincoat."
"Look at my socks. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your socks."
"Look at my shoes. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your shoes."
"Now you have lots of clothes," says Lebo. "Oh no I don't," says Nomsa. "These clothes are all too big for me!"
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
Frog and Snake are friends.
Frog says, “Come with me to visit my mother.”
“Thank you,” Snake says. “Who will watch our homes?”
“I will watch your homes,” says Monkey.
Frog puts white ants in a bag for her mother.
Frog and Snake leave at dawn. They go into a forest.
They meet a gang of squirrels. Snake is afraid.
Frog protects her friend.
When they get to Mother's house, they are hungry.
They wash and get ready to eat.
“Snake, please sit up,” says Frog.
Snake tries to sit up, but she is not a frog.
“I cannot sit up like a frog,” says Snake.
Frog will not listen.
“You do not understand me. I am going home.”
Snake is annoyed. “I thought Frog was my friend.”And that's why even today, the Snake and Frog are enemies.
This is Khalai. She is seven years old. Her name means 'the good one.'
Khalai wakes up and talks to the orange tree. "Please orange tree, grow big and give us lots of ripe oranges."
Khalai walks to school. On the way,  she talks to the grass. "Please grass,  grow greener and don't dry up."
Khalai sees flowers. "Please flowers,  keep blooming so I can put you in my hair."
Khalai talks to the tree at her school. "Please tree,  put out big branches so we can read under your shade."
Khalai talks to the hedge round her school. "Please,  grow strong and protect us from bad people."
When Khalai returns home,  she visits the orange tree. "Are your oranges ripe yet?" Khalai asks the tree.
"The oranges are still green," sighs Khalai.  "I will see you tomorrow orange tree," says Khalai. "Perhaps then,  you will have a ripe orange for me!"
Why is the sky blue?
It is not always blue. Is it?
Why are leaves green?
They are not always green. Are they?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow. Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is blood red?
There is iron in the blood. That makes it red.
Why is salt white?
I don't know!
One day an elephant was going to drink water.
There were two giraffes who were also going to drink water.
There were three Buffaloes and four birds. They were all going to drink water.
Five impalas and six warthogs were also going to drink water.
Seven frogs and eight fishes were in the water.
Nine Zebras were going to drink water.
One lion was going to drink water.
Off all the animals, who is the toughest of them all and will be the first one to drink water?
My friend Kiki and I walk home from school.
One day, a man followed us.
His teeth were brown. He had pimples on the face.
When we looked at him, he shouted at us angrily.
Kiki managed to run away.
They threw me into a van.
They put me in a dark room. My hands were tied.
A man said, "Eat this food. The journey is long."
As I ate, the man smoked a cigarette.
Suddenly, the other men came in pulling my friend Kiki.
We heard the men arguing and shouting in the next room.
Kiki said, "We must escape. Our parents cannot pay them."
We pulled the timber from the window until we saw light.
Kiki climbed out and ran to get help.
The men rushed into the room. The leader was angry.
They went back to the other room and continued arguing.
I heard a voice saying, "Don't be afraid. Police are here."
They were shouting and making noise. I heard some gunshots.
A policewoman said, "Everything is over. You are safe now."
After that day, Kiki and I were more careful.
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. “Why do you have a long neck?” she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. “Why does your horn have a sharp point?”
She was curious about Hippo. “Why do you have red eyes?” she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. “What does Crocodile eat for dinner?” she asked.
﻿“Never ask a question like that!” said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to baby elephant.“Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner,” squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
“Hello,” said a stone near the river bank.“Hello,” said Baby Elephant. “Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?” she asked.
“Bend down and I will tell you,” said the stone. “Lower, lower,” said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, “Snap!” Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws.“Crocodile will eat you for dinner!” squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, “Thud!” she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
Elephant is thirsty.He is happy to have the whole pond to himself.
Two giraffes are thirsty too.Will they fight over the water?
Three buffaloes want to drink water.Will they let the four birds also drink some water?
Five antelopes need some water.Can five antelopes and six warthogs drink water from the same source?
Will the seven zebras be let to drink water as well?Let's wait and see.
Frogs and fish swim in the same water.Humans can swim alongside frogs and fish.They can all drink water from the same source.
The lion roars when he arrives at the river.Can the lion, the elephant, buffaloes, the giraffe, warthogs, antelopes and birds all drink water together?
The elephant and the lion can drink water from the same river.Where does your water come from?Who do you share the water with?
Ape meets Crocodile by the lake.
“Where do you live?” asks Ape.“In the lake,” says Crocodile.
“Where do you live?” asks Crocodile. “In the trees,” says Ape.
“Can you swim?” asks Crocodile.
“I cannot swim,” says Ape. “I can teach you.”
“We are friends. Do not be afraid,” says Crocodile.
“Ape, my uncle is sick. He needs meat,” says Crocodile.
Ape is very afraid.Will Crocodile eat her?
Ape wants to escape from Crocodile.
Ape has an idea.
“I will give you my heart for him,” Ape promises.
“My heart is in a tree on the land,” says Ape.
“Will you fetch your heart?” asks Crocodile. “Yes,” says Ape.
Crocodile swims back to the land. Ape runs to the trees.
“You are not my friend. You lied!” says Crocodile.
“We are not friends. You want to eat me!” says Ape.
My name is Simo.
Meet my new friends.
Zizo,  Lele,  Sisa and Ayanda.
Zizo loves football.
Lele loves to swim.
Sisa loves to play hide and seek.
Ayanda loves reading.
I enjoy everything my friends love.
I will play football with Zizo.
Sometimes I swim with Lele.
Or even play hide and seek with Sisa.
Come on,  make new friends and have fun.
Play football together.
Swim together.
Play hide and seek together.
Or even read together.
Selemeng loves cats. There are many cats at her house.
Selemeng has one black cat. This cat eats a lot of meat.
Selemeng has one fat cat. This cat eats everything.
Cat number three, runs up a tree. This cat gets stuck in the tree.
Selemeng climbs the tree. She gets stuck with cat three. Selemeng's mother has to help them get down.
Selemeng has two lazy cats. They lie outside in the sun all day.
Selemeng has three busy cats. They catch rats in the kitchen at night.
Selemeng has one dog. His name is Lirafi. Lirafi has no friends. He is sad.
Selemeng's cats do not like Lirafi. They chase him out of the house. Lirafi runs away.
Selemeng finds Lirafi and brings him home. The cats are not happy. They do not want to see Lirafi again.
How many cats does Selemeng have? She has eight cats.
How many dogs does Selemeng have? She has one dog. Where is Lirafi now?
It was a little girl who first saw the mysterious shape in the distance.
As the shape moved closer, the girl saw that it was a heavily pregnant woman.
Shy but brave, the little girl moved nearer to the woman. "We must keep her with us," the little girl's people decided. "We'll keep her and her child safe."
The child was soon on its way. Everyone wanted to help. "Push!" "Bring blankets!" "Water!" "Puuuuussssshhh!"
But when they saw the baby, everyone jumped back in shock. "A donkey!"
Everyone began to argue. "We said we would keep mother and child safe, and that's what we'll do," said some. "But they will bring us bad luck!" said others.
And so the woman found herself alone again. She wondered what to do with this awkward child. She wondered what to do with herself.
But finally she had to accept that he was her child and she was his mother. Now, if the child had stayed that same, small size, everything might have been different.
But the donkey child grew and grew until he could no longer fit on his mother's back. And no matter how hard he tried, he could not behave like a human being. His mother was often tired and frustrated. Sometimes she made him do work meant for animals.
Confusion and anger built up inside Donkey. He couldn't do this and he couldn't do that. He couldn't be like this and he couldn't be like that. He became so angry that, one day, he kicked his mother to the ground.
Donkey was filled with shame. He ran away as far and as fast as he could.
By the time he stopped running, it was night, and Donkey was lost. "Hee haw?" he whispered to the darkness. "Hee Haw?" it echoed back. He was all alone. Curling himself into a tight ball, he fell into a deep and troubled sleep.
Donkey woke up to find a strange old man staring down at him. He looked into the old man's eyes and started to feel a twinkle of hope.
Donkey went to stay with the old man, who taught him many different ways to survive. Donkey listened and learned, and so did the old man. They helped each other, and they laughed together.
One morning, the old man asked Donkey to carry him to the top of a mountain.
High up amongst the clouds they fell asleep. Donkey dreamed that his mother was sick and calling to him.
When Donkey woke up, the clouds had disappeared along with his friend, the old man.
Donkey finally knew what to do.
Donkey found his mother, alone and mourning her lost child. They stared at each other for a long time. And then hugged each other very hard.
The donkey child and his mother have grown together and found many ways of living together. Slowly,  all around them, other families have started to settle.
Anansi the Spider, and Rabbit were friends. They lived in a peaceful village in the mountains. Rabbit owned a big farm with lots of vegetables and fruit. Even though Rabbit shared generously with his friend, Anansi was unhappy and jealous.
So Anansi thought of a clever plan to take over Rabbit's farm. Soon Rabbit was left poor and homeless. Anansi was the proud owner of all Rabbit's land, vegetables, and fruit.
Anansi went to the market to sell his fruit and vegetables. He made so much money that he filled a big basket with it! With some of the money, he bought maize for his family, and put it on top of the money in the basket.
Anansi happily headed home with his basket on his head, singing. He was thinking about all the things he was going to buy with his money.
On the way, it started to drizzle. Soon the drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. Anansi the Spider left his basket on the side of the road to shelter under a tree. But from there he kept a close watch on his precious basket.
It started to rain even more heavily, and Anansi was getting cold and wet. So he ran into a hole. "I will stay in this hole until the rain stops," said Anansi to himself. "At least my money is protected by the maize I put on top of it."
A little while later, Vulture was flying around and spotted the basket on the side of the road. He saw that there was money and maize in the basket. So he covered the basket with his wings and waited for the rain to stop.
Anansi saw Vulture sitting on his basket. "Oh thank you, my friend, for protecting my basket," he said to the Vulture. "Excuse me, Anansi, did I hear you right?" asked Vulture. "Your basket? This basket is mine! I found it here on the road side!" Anansi could not believe his ears! "It's mine, I tell you!"
Furious, Anansi went and reported the theft to the chief. But Vulture said to the chief and his elders, "How could anyone leave a basket full of money and maize unguarded on the road?" "But I was watching my basket," said Anansi. "It's my money and my maize!" "I was looking after the basket when you came and said it was yours!" replied Vulture.
When the chief and his elders had listened carefully to both sides, they sent Anansi and Vulture away. They discussed the story for a long time. Eventually they reached a decision.
They summoned Anansi and the Vulture again. "We believe Vulture's story," they said. "He is not the thief. You were trying to claim something that was not yours." Anansi could not believe his ears! He burst into tears.
The news soon spread that the judgement had gone against Anansi. As he walked away, he heard Rabbit laughing and laughing. Rabbit went back to his farm and grew fruit and vegetables. But Anansi was poor again, with no friends.
One day Tortoise was walking through the veld. He was looking for something. He gazed into the distance and squinted at the grass. Then he walked past Snail.
Snail said,  "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!" She climbed onto Tortoise's shell. Tortoise walked on with Snail on his back. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. The sun was high in the sky.
A little later they passed Sparrow. "Are you looking for something?" asked Sparrow. "Yes,  Sparrow,  I'm looking for my house. Have you seen it,  by any chance?" Sparrow said,  "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!"
He flapped his wings and he whizzed away. "But you're going too fast for me," complained Tortoise. Sparrow came back. "Alright,  then I'll hop on too."
Tortoise carried on,  with Snail and Sparrow perched on his shell. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. The sun had inched lower in the sky.
A little later they passed Ladybird. "Are you looking for something?" asked Ladybird. "Yes,  Ladybird,  I'm looking for my house. Have you seen it,  by any chance?"
Ladybird said,  "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!" She hopped onto Tortoise's back and on he went,  with Snail and Sparrow and Ladybird on his back. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. A breeze started to blow.
A little later they passed Mouse. He was making a garland of daisies. "Are you looking for something?" asked Mouse. "Yes,  Mouse,  I'm looking for my house. Have you seen it,  by any chance?"
Mouse said: "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!" She hopped onto Tortoise's back. "Wait,  I can't leave my flowers behind." Tortoise waited. Mouse stretched and stretched and scooped up her daisies.
Tortoise walked on,  with Snail and Sparrow and Ladybird and Mouse on his back. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. The wind swept leaves off the ground and swirled them around Tortoise's feet. He was tired. "You lot are heavy," he sighed.
The wind got stronger. The sky turned dark. "Oh,  where is my house?" asked Tortoise. Thunder roared in the hills. Lightning flashed in the distance. Drip-drip came the rain.
The wind whirled and whipped. It blew Snail and Sparrow and Ladybird and Mouse right off Tortoise's back.
And then came the hail,  tip-tip-tip. Tortoise got such a fright he shrank into his shell. It was warm and cosy in there. "Oh,  here is my house!" smiled Tortoise.
"Oh,  here is Tortoise's house!" said Snail and Robin and Mouse.
Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boy wearing a beautiful shirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like the one that boy has," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt for Hamisi!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
Chicken and Millipede were friends.
They went to play football.
Chicken was the goal keeper.
Millipede scored three goals!
Chicken was annoyed.
Chicken swallowed Millipede.
Then, Chicken met with Millipede's Mother.
"Help Mother! Chicken swallowed me!" cried Millipede from inside Chicken.
Millipede tasted bad. Chicken felt sick.
Chicken started coughing.
Chicken coughed out Millipede.
Chicken and Millipede are now enemies.
There was a big dark jungle. There were lots of trees and a narrow path. Many animals and birds lived here.
One day, all the animals came together.“Did you hear?” asked Tota, the parrot.“Yes,” said Hirni, the deer.“What?” asked Darpok, the rabbit.“We have a school in the jungle,”answered Zhoola, the monkey.Mota, the elephant wondered, “Hmph?”Lamboo, the giraffe said, “Oh, good!”Dheema, the snail squealed, “Hurry, let’s go!”
Tota, the parrot flew ahead. Zhoola, the monkey jumped from tree to tree. Poorakha, the python slithered fast. “Here!” shouted Tota. “Can you read?”“It is upside down, I think,” said Zhoolahanging by the branch. Poorakha concluded, “Hisssss. No one can read.”
Soon, all the other friends joined them.Lamboo looked over the tree. “No one here,” he said.Zhoola repeated, “No one here.”Tota proposed, “Look carefully!”Pilloo, the little bear declared, “I found a room!”
“I found a swing,” announced Dheema.“What are these blocks?” Darpok wanted to know.“What is this?” was Zhoola’s question.Poorakha explained, “I believe, this is a pencil.”
Mota and Lamboo found a classroom.They called the others, “Look, what is this?”Everyone came with school bags. They began shouting, “Teacher! Teacher!Where is our teacher?” No one knew.
Then they heard a roar. They heard a loud roar. They heard a louder roar. Poorakha was worried. Dheema was scared. Tota hid behind the board. Lamboo and Zhoola were puzzled. Who is this? “Hup!” said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke.
Who is this? “Hup!” said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke. They all looked at the teacher. Up and down carefully. Then they looked at one another. The teacher turned to write on the black board.
“Jump,” said Zhoola.“Fly!” said Tota. Thump, thump, thump ran Mota.“Run, run, run fast,” screamed Dheema.“Bhagoooo,” they all shouted together.When the teacher turned... there was no one in the class.
This is Natabo.She has six brothers.
Her parents giveher a small pot. She loves it.
One day herbrothers break the pot.
Natabo cannotfind her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away.She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Pleasecome down," theyask.
Her brotherssing, "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night.Because they weremade of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! Hemelted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose,he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Long ago, animals had no legs.
Maguru had given legs only to people.
Maguru decided to give legs to every animal.
The animals wanted legs to walk and run.
It was hard for them to crawl.
When the day came, different animals crawled to Maguru's house.
Maguru gave legs to animals and birds.
Some animals danced, while others fell down.
They said, "We will never crawl again."
Millipede was the last animal on the line.
Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.
Millipede said happily, “I will move faster than others.”
After Millipede, Snake came begging, “Please give me some legs.”
Snake said to Maguru, "I over-slept."
Maguru did not find any legs for Snake.
From that day, Snake still waits to get legs.
This house is in Congo. I like this house.
We had our own bathroom.We had our own toilet.
We had a garden. I was planting my own garden.
My mother told me, "My mother taught me to plant. Now I am teaching you."
I planted tomatoes and spinach. I did it alone.
I would take tomatoes to my mother.She would say, "Thank you."
We have no garden here in South Africa.
It was the first wedding in the Roberts family,  and Mary had never been so excited in her life. "My chickens,  I am going to be John and Hawa's bridesmaid,  with a new dress and shoes!" she said to her chickens. Mary told her chickens everything. Her father had given the chickens to her as a birthday present,  and she loved them very much.
"Take those dirty scruffy chickens out of here Mary!" shouted her mother,  "I don't want them anywhere near this wedding tent."
Mary shooed her chickens out of the tent. "Run away you silly things." she said,  "I don't want you to be eaten at John and Patience's wedding!"
"Mme says that this is going to be the best wedding ever seen in Buchanan," Mary told her chickens,  "and she says that I can help all the older girls with the cooking." The chickens paid no attention to her. "Mary!" called her mother from inside,  "leave those chickens of yours and come and help me with these pots please!"
Mary followed her chickens out into the yard. "Mama is right,  you are a disgrace," she scolded them So Mary thought for a while. Suddenly she smiled and said to herself,  "I have an excellent idea." She went and filled a bucket with water from the spring. Mary had a lot of trouble catching her chickens. They did not think that a bath was such a good idea.
Mary put the first chicken into the bucket of water. It clucked at the top of its voice and flapped its wings like crazy. "Hold still you silly thing," Mary shouted,  "this won't take long!" When Mary wiped the chicken's nose and eyes it suddenly went limp and flopped over the side of the bucket.
"This is no time to sleep," said Mary. She gave it a good shake to get all the water out. "If you are not going to wake up now,  I'll have to put you somewhere to dry nicely," she said. She laid the chicken out on the grass to dry. The chicken lay completely still.
Mary washed each and every one of her chickens. Each and every one of them went limp and floppy before she was finished with it. She put all those eight chickens in a row on the grass to dry. Not one of them moved a single feather. "I'll leave them to sleep a little," Mary thought to herself,  and off she went to check on the collard greens.
Mrs. Teeweh and Mrs. Beh were Mary's aunts. They did not like each other at all. The aunts had been preparing for months for Patience's wedding,  but they would not even think about riding together in the same taxi.
Mrs. Teeweh spotted Mary's chickens laid out to dry. "What a nice little snack for me to take home!" she said to herself. She took off her shawl and carefully wrapped all those chickens up in it. Not a single chicken moved. "Perfect!" she smiled,  "now I shall put them somewhere where Mrs. Beh will not ever find them," and she put the bundle around the corner among the pumpkin vines.
Patience's wedding was wonderful. Those chickens did not get up off the roof to join in when all the bridesmaid ladies danced into the yard. Not one of the chickens stirred when the church choir sang in their loudest,  sweetest voices. The chickens were still lying on the roof when the priest gave his sermon. They did not even twitch a feather when the pigs and Mary's grandfather all snored loudly in the middle of the sermon. Not one foot of those chickens trembled when sheep wandered into the tent,  nearly knocking over the wedding cake.
It was only when the groom's father was halfway through his speech that things started to change on that roof.
An old woman had chickens and an old rooster.
Her grandson visited her. She decided to kill the old rooster.
The old rooster ran away to the big city.
The old rooster met the cat running away from her boss.
The old rooster and the cat met the dog running away.
They were joined by a horse which was running away too.
The animals came to a house. They saw thieves inside!
The animals sang loudly to chase away the thieves.
They ate the food they found in the house.
The thieves returned later. The animals attacked them.
The thieves ran away forever.
The animals lived together happily in the house.
One day I met Agnes.Agnes is a teacher.
Agnes uses crutches to walk.
When I went to town, I saw Metobo. He is a radio DJ.
Metobo has albinism.He has problems with his eyes and with his skin.
My neighbour isMoraa. She is a farmer.
Moraa has a problem with hearing. She speaks using Sign language.
Osero is the best soccer player in my school. I like to watch him play.
Osero lost his hands in an accident. However, he scores many goals for his team!
There lived a girl called Kalabushe. She talked a lot.
One day, Kalabushe’s aunt fell ill.
That evening, Kalabushe took food to her sick aunt.
Kalabushe met a hyena who had changed into a person.
Kalabushe told him, “I am carrying meat, eggs and milk.”
The hyena licked his lips as he thought about meat.
The hyena ran ahead of Kalabushe to her aunt’s house.
He swallowed Kalabushe’s aunt. He covered himself with her blanket.
Kalabushe arrived and called out, “Aunt, where are you?”
Kalabushe saw someone covered with a big blanket.
Kalabushe asked, “Aunt, why are your ears so big today?”
“Aunt, why are your eyes so big?”
“Aunt, why is your mouth big?” The hyena swallowed her!
Kalabushe kept asking questions while inside the hyena’s stomach.
He became tired of Kalabushe’s questions. He spat her out.
Kalabushe and her aunt were rescued by the villagers.
Oscar has a problem with his eyes. He cannot see any fish.
But he will not eat his carrots.
Johnnie the seahorse says, "Oscar, eat your carrots!"
But Oscar does not like the taste of carrots.
"Carrots will help you to see better," says Johnnie.
Oscar goes to the doctor. Oscar and Johnnie wait for Dr Shakes.
Dr Shakes says, "Glasses will help you to see better."
Oscar does not want to wear glasses.
But they help Oscar see the fishes. Now he eats his carrots with fish!
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night. Because they were made of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! He melted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose, he flew away, singing in the morning light.
I love to play soccer. I love to play soccer with Thando, Nhlanhla and Ben.
This is my mum.I love my mum. She makes me laugh.
I love God, because God created me.
I love school, because the teachers teach me what I need to know.
I love to play with dogs, because it is fun.
I love birthdays, because I like to celebrate.
And I love myself because …
… because … I do!
Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn,  and no tail.
It is fat,  with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze,  this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow,  what would you do?
One day, Mr Sloth came to visit. He said: I’m sleepy! I need a good branch for a bed! Yawn! Yawn! Yawn!
I’m quite good at climbing. I know how to swing.But sleeping’s my favourite, favourite thing!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth! A giraffe’s eating there!He might think you’re lunch and start nibbling your hair!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth! There’s a beehive right there! You’ll never get sleep with those bees everywhere!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth, that’s a snake over there! Not a branch! Poor old snake. You gave him quite a scare. Sssssss! sssSSSs! SSss! Ssss!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth!There’s a bird squawking there! You’ll never get sleep with that noise in the air!Haw-haw! Haw-Haw! Haw-haw!
Try climb one more branch, Mr Sloth! they all said. And that branch was just the right one for his bed.
The bird and the snake, the giraffe and each bee. Were happy to have Mr Sloth in their tree.
Tingi lived with his grandmother.
He used to look after the cows with her.
One day the soldiers came.
They took the cows away.
Tingi and his grandmother ran away.
They hid in the bush until night.
Then the soldiers came back.
Grandmother hid Tingi under the leaves.
One of the soldiers put his foot right on him,  but he kept quiet.
When it was safe,  Tingi and his grandmother came out.
They crept home very quietly.
Long,  long time ago,  there lived Hare and Elephant. Hare was clever and cunning. Elephant was slow and vain.
One day,  Hare went to the market and bought a pair of beautiful shoes made of iron. On his way home,  Hare met Elephant. Elephant liked Hare's shoes so much that he asked Hare to take him to the place where he bought them.
Hare said to Elephant,  "You should get a better pair than mine,  that way you can show off to the whole village and make others jealous." Elephant was so excited. Hare and Elephant agreed to meet the next day at Hare's home.
The following day,  Elephant went to Hare's house. Hare said to him,  "Welcome my friend,  come in so we can get you the best pair of shoes that no one else has."
Elephant was surprised and said,  "Excuse me my friend,  I thought we were going to the market to buy the shoes?" Hare answered and said,  "Elephant,  do you want the shoes or is it the market that you want to see?"
Elephant calmed down and said,  "Of course I want shoes. I did not sleep last night because I was thinking of my new shoes all the time." So Hare led Elephant to the back of the house where he had lit a huge fire. Hare said to Elephant,  "Stand in the fire so that the shoes can start forming."
Because Elephant was eager to have the shoes,  he did as Hare said. At first he did not mind the heat of the fire. Then Elephant's hooves began to burn. He felt a lot of pain but because he wanted beautiful shoes,  he did not move. As the pain increased,  Elephant started to cry.
Hare said to Elephant,  "Stop crying otherwise the shoes will be ugly." Elephant quietened down a little but the pain increased. While tears rolled down Elephant's face,  Hare secretly laughed and said,  "Stop crying if you want the shoes."
When the pain was too much to put up with,  Elephant jumped out of the fire. Unfortunately,  his hooves had already burned so he could not walk. He lay down roaring with pain.
Hare went close to Elephant's ear and whispered,  "You were so close to having the most beautiful pair of shoes,  but now you cannot have them."
It was many months before Elephant could stand up because his hooves were so badly burnt. They were flat. When he managed to walk,  he was limping.
He limped all the way to his home where his wife and children were waiting for him in tears. To this day,  Elephant still limps and his hooves are flat.
Andile o belegetswe kwa Gqeberha, Kwa Kapa Bokone.O ne a nna le mmaagwe le rraagwe. Ba nna kwa Brighton.Gaufi, go le motsana o bidiwa Tyeni.Ntatemogolo wa gagwe o ne a nna koo.
Andile o ne a rata go etela Ntatemogolo. Ana le lesaka la dikgomo.O ne a botsa Andile gore, “Dikgomo tse tshegadi le tse namagadi di kae? Le gore ke tse kae mo losakeng?”Lwantlha, Andile o ithutile go bala go fitlha go lesome, a dirisa menwana. A atolosa gi ya go masomeamabedi, ka maoto a gagwe! O ne a itse go bala ka botlhano.
Mo mosong, mokoko o ne o lela. E le ura ya botlhano fa ba tsoga. Ba ipaakanyetsa go gama dikgomo.Morago, ba ya kwa thabeng e e gaufi go fudisa dikgomo.Ba dirisa letsatsi go buisa nako.
Mo motshegareng, Ntataagwe mogolo a mmitsa. Gore a tle go ja. E ne e le ura ya bolesomepedi.O ne a itse fa e le nako ya go ya gae.E le fa letsatsi le dikelaO ne a bala dikgomo. Go netefatsa fa di buile tsotlhe.
Fa Andile a simolola go ya sekolong. Rraagwe a mo rekela tshupanako.A dirisa tshupanako go bala ka bobedi, boraro le bone.E le ka fa tshupanako e na le dipalo go simolola ka nngwe go fitlha ka lesomepedi.A itse gore lenaka le legolo, mo lesomepedi ke ura, mme, fa le supile thataro ke masome-a-mararo morago ga ura.
Andile o ne a bala dipalo ka tlhaloganyo. A balela go ya kwa pele le kwa morago a dirisa tlhogo.O ne a kgona go bala matsatsi a beke le dikgwedi tsa ngwaga, ka tatelano.Ka nako e dikgomo di belegang. O ne a atisa dipalo a bala dinamane.
Ka Labotlhano a paka diaparo a ya kwa go ntatemogolo. A nna Lamatlhatso le Latshipi.Ka Mosupologo a boela gae, go ya sekolong.Fa dikolo di tswalelwa a ya go eta, a itumelela go disa dikgomo.
Fa Andile a simolola sekolo. Ba ne ba dirisa majwe le dikotana go bala.O ne a dirisa menwana go kwala fa fatshe. A ikatisa go tlhakanya dipalo mo mmung.Phaposiborutelo e le fa tlase ga setlhare. Fa pula e na, ba sa ye sekolong.
Fa mosimane wa kwa Brighton a gola, a ya kwa Yunibesithing go ithutela dipalo. O ithutile dingwaga di le dintsi.Gompieni, Andile Mji o dira kwa lefapheng la dipalo le mananepalo.O santse a kgona go buisa nako jaaka bogologolo, a dirisa letsatsi.
Gompieni, Andile ke moitseanape Mji. O dirisa menwana ya gagwe go tlanya mo khomphutareng.O dirisa dipalo le kerafo go kwala dikgang. Dipalo o di dirisa go fitlhelela ditharabololo.O dirisa mananepalo go araba dipotso jaaka, ‘Ke bana ba dinyaga di le kae kwa sekolong?’
Moitseanape Mji o dira ka khomphutara le dipalo.A re, “Khomphutara e botlhokwa, fela nako nngwe e a latlhega! Tlhaloganyo ya me e nna mo tlhogong, go fitlha kwa bokhutlong.Mo dipalong, ga go fetoge sepe. Dipalo di nnela ruri.”
Moitseanape Mji o go tshwaretse molaetsa:“Go itse dipalo, o tshwanetse go ikatisa go dira ka dinomoro.Dipalo ke ‘go dira’ Dipalo ke mokgwa.O tshwanetse go ithuta go akanya ka dinomoro. Ka fao, o tla nna mogaka!”
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. “Ants don’t read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need.”
Little Ant would read all day, he’d read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down.
The ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. “A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read.”
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said “Hey, there’s one!”
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger, carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand “Now I think I understand.” “The way you love to read a book … Makes me want to take alook.”
"Let's play Hide and Seek," said my brother to me.
My brother was coming.I was hiding behind the curtain.
He looked for me all over the house.
He came into the room where I was hiding.
Then, he went outside!
I ran out.I shouted, "You didn't find me!"
One special Friday Yusuf's father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woolen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf's eyes brighten when Papa says,  "Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you."
A fish and a gift? Oh,  what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer's Corner. Gulls circle the sky. "Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" they cry. "What will you bring back for Yusuf?" Papa rings his bell. "Wait and see what it will be!"
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf's grandfather,  Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father,  Oupagrootjie Ridwaan,  knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa's arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains,  his back muscles ripple. Papa sings as he works: "Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don't you stop."
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf's father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand,  hundreds washed up in a storm. "Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cried the gulls. "What will you do to help the turtles?"  Papa said,  "We saved those turtles,  I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean,  every last one."
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. "Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don't you stop."
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. "But we'll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There's not so many fish left in the sea," says Ouma shaking her head.  Yusuf holds Ouma's hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins."Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. "What is for supper?"
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words. "Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cried the gulls. "There's enough sea for everybody," said Yusuf's father. He showed them the fishing license that had been Oupa Salie's. "Waves for all. Water for free."
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars,  her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore,  carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits. "Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cry the gulls. "What will Yusuf's father bring from the ocean?"
Yusuf's father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf's father untangles the nets,  singing to the shark: "Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don't you stop."  When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves,  leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa's finger. "Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cry the gulls. "What did you bring back for Yusuf?" As the sun goes down,  Papa answers the gulls. "A lucky shark tooth for my boy." At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
Let me tell you my story. I start as a small spark.
I spread when the wind carries me.
We are good friends,  you and I.
I cook your food.
I light your night.
I have many tricks.
I am part of your family.
But be careful when you invite me to your home. I don't like to be left alone.
Come back, cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back, cat! That’s way too high.
Come back, cat! Don’t go outside.
Come back, cat! That’s not yours.
Come back, cat. What have you got?
Come back, cat.  That’s not your friend!
Hello, cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It’s nap time now.
Cat?
These people are disagreeing with each other.
"Teachers are most important. You need us to learn," says teacher.
"Builders are most important. You need houses," says builder.
"Carpenters are most important. You need furniture," says carpenter.
"Doctors are most important. You need us to get well."
"Farmers are most important. You need us for food."
"Students are most important!" says the student.
"Because you were all students first!" Now everyone agrees.
Long, long ago there was a king called Kayanja. He lived in a palace with his queen and their daughter, Princess Apenyo. Princess Apenyo was such a beautiful young woman that every man wanted to marry her. But king Kayanja demanded a very high bride price for the princess.
Near king Kayanja's palace lived a chief called Aludah the Great. He was called "the Great" because everybody in the neighbourhood obeyed him, and he was very violent to anyone who disobeyed him! Chief Aludah's wife had recently died of malaria, and he wanted another wife.
So the fat old chief went to king Kayanja to offer bride wealth for the young princess. While the two men were discussing the price, the maid Kakembo overheard their conversation. Maid Kakembo was very close to princess Apenyo.
Chief Aludah agreed to give half of his wealth to king Kayanja, including a needle, which was also part of the bride price. Preparations were made in secret for the wedding between chief Aludah and princess Apenyo. The king knew that his daughter would not be happy with this decision.
One week before the royal wedding day, maid Kakembo approached Apenyo. "My dear Princess,  your father has organised your wedding with chief Aludah, and it will take place in one week."
Princess Apenyo was shocked and at first didn't know what to do. Then she thought, "I will never marry chief Aludah, that fat old man. Never! I must hurry to Trevor and see what he can do before it's too late." Trevor was princess Apenyo's boyfriend.
That night Apenyo crept out of the palace. If her father discovered where she was going he would be very angry. She ran through the thick, dark forest over rocks and shrubs. When finally she arrived at Trevor's house she was tired and thirsty.
"My love, why have you run all this long distance alone and at such a time of night?" asked Trevor. He fetched water for her and allowed her to rest. Trevor could not settle down while he waited for Apenyo to talk.
"My dear princess, what is the problem?" asked Trevor. Apenyo breathed heavily and said sadly, "My father wants to marry me off to chief Aludah the Great. But I can't marry that horrible man. Trevor, I want to marry you even if you are poor. I am ready to suffer. I love you."
"But princess, I have nothing to pay as your bride price, you know I'm a poor boy," cried Trevor. Apenyo replied, "I know, but it's only you I can get married to." She thought for a while and said, "Let's go to Kategga the boatman and ask him to take us across the river. That way we can escape and my father will never find us."
Back at the palace, king Kayanja had discovered princess Apenyo's disappearance. He ordered his subjects to search for her everywhere. The king's guards, soldiers, and everyone else searched, but they couldn't find the princess. They went back to the king and told him that Apenyo was nowhere to be seen. "Then go back and search again," King Kayanja ordered. He was very annoyed.
As Princess Apenyo and Trevor hurried to the riverbank, dark clouds began gathering in the sky. A heavy storm was coming.
Kategga the boatman was mooring his boat when the young couple approached him. Trevor asked Kategga to row them across the river. Kategga refused to accept, explaining that a heavy storm was fast approaching, and it would be too dangerous.
Trevor insisted and explained to Kategga why they must cross. He then put his hand deep in his pocket and took out a cowrie shell to give to Kategga. When Kategga heard their story and saw the beautiful shell, he felt sorry for them. He agreed to row them across the river in spite of the weather.
When King Kayanja and chief Aludah reached the bank, they saw the three people in the boat. They realised that the young lovers had escaped. Heavy winds rocked the boat and Kategga could no longer control it. King Kayanja shouted, "Apenyo, please come back! I forgive you. I will never punish you or Trevor."
But, it was too late. The boat tipped over and the three people were thrown into the wild water. They all drowned. After that day, everyone in king Kayanja's kingdom could marry anyone they wanted, rich or poor.
Two little hands to hold.
Two little feet to kick.
Two little eyes to see.
Two little ears to hear.
And two loving arms to HUG!
And two loving arms to HUG!
Have you ever heard of a place called Nkagala?
Mrs and Mr Dubula live in Nkagala.They have five children.
The boys names are Sobuka and Njalo. The girls names are Nthando, Chika and Sabu.
Gogo Mampinga is an old woman who lives in Nkagala.She has no children and stays alone.
The Dubula family visit Gogo Mampinga to help her. They love her very much.
Gogo Mampinga cooks them delicious soup, made of beans and vegetables.
When they arrive at Gogo's place, the two boys go to fetch water for her.
Then, they all sit together under a tree and enjoy Gogo Mampinga's soup.
It was time for animals to sleep. One did not obey.
The farmer asked Piggy to go into the pen. She refused.
The farmer asked Trusty Whip to whip Piggy. He refused.
Fiery Fire refused to burn Trusty Whip for disobeying.
Clear Water disobeyed the farmer by not putting out Fiery Fire.
The farmer asked Milky Moo to drink Clear Water.
Milky Moo said, “I will drink the water. I am thirsty.”
Clear Water cried, “Don’t drink me. I will put out Fire.”
Fiery Fire shouted, “No, you won’t. I will burn Trusty Whip.”
Trusty Whip cried, “Please don’t burn me. I will whip Piggy.”
Piggy was annoyed. “I will go into the pen.”
Piggy went into her pen and was ready for bed.
This is me.
I live with my mom, brother and sister.
My mom likes to cook.
Sometimes my mom visits her friends.
When she is away, I clean the house and wash the dishes.
When it is night time, my mom tells us to pray.
When it is my birthday, my mom brings me something.
I love my mom.
His hoe was too short.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was too short.
His bicycle was too short.
This man was too tall!
He made a very long hoe handle.
He made very high door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for many years.
In Miwa Forest, there lived a monkey who was always sad. This was because every time she had a baby, it died.
The pain of losing her babies made Monkey jump up and down. She would jump to one branch, then to another, and cry out, "Kwi! Kwi! Kwi!"
Monkey was sadder when she saw other monkeys with their babies.
The sad monkey sat on a branch. Days passed and she cried more and more.
Then she gave birth again. She decided to take the baby to the path.She wanted people passing by, to see the baby and wish it well.
Monkey put her baby on the path. At that time, a hunter was returning home. He saw the baby monkey lying on the side of the path.
The hunter carried the baby monkey to his house. When the hunter reached home, his three sons wanted to hold the baby monkey.
The boys sang: Throw it up! Throw it down! Throw it to me! Throw it to him! The baby monkey was thrown from one child to the other.
Mother Monkey hid in a tree and watched them. She was afraid that this baby would also die, like the others.
Then the hunter's wife saw her children playing with the little monkey. She said, "Be careful! Bring it here. You will drop it!"
She took the baby monkey in her arms, and blessed it.
The hunter's wife put the baby monkey down. Mother Monkey picked the baby up and disappeared into the forest. Mother Monkey never lost another baby from then on.
It is hot sunny Saturday morning on the farm. Maya, Duksie and Doobie are helping Mama K in her vegetable garden. The children work all morning. They dig compost into the soil. They weed and water. Then they harvest what is ripe and ready. Today each of the children will take home freshly picked strawberries, spinach and carrots.
Mama K always gives the children a treat for helping her. Sometimes its cake or chocolate, or she buys longsweets that look like snakes. Sometimes it's apples, pears or oranges. Mama K has only one rule. “Share it fair!” The children know they must share the treats equally, so they all get the same amount.
Today Mama K has baked a round strawberry cake with pink icing and berries from her garden. The childrenwait on the grass for their treat. “Here you go!” smiles Mama K. “But remember the rule. Everyone must get the same. Share it fair! Don't fight!”
Maya has the first turn to share the cake. She uses the knife to trace lines in the icing. The others watch her. She does not cut the cake yet. The others must first agree if her way is fair. “I think I will make two cuts down like this. Now we have three slices, all the same!” Maya shows them.
“No way!” says Duksie, “the one in the middle is much too big!” Doobie also shakes his head. Maya laughs and shrugs and tells Duksie to try.
“Here! Pass me the knife, I'll do it. Easy peasy!” chants Duksie. First she rubs out Maya's pattern in the icing and licks her fingers.
Then she makes one cut across and one down. “Look, I made my three slices!” “That's not fair!” shout Mayaand Doobie together.
“Share it fair! The pieces must be the same size and shape,” adds Doobie. “Why don't you try Doobie, SmartyPants?” smirks Duksie. “I bet you can't do it!”
“I wish the cake was a square or a rectangle, and then it would be easy!” says Doobie thoughtfully. “Or, if there were four of us to share the round cake that would also be easy,” says Maya.
And then! A picture comes into Doobie's head. He sees the sparkling silver badge at the front of his father's big red truck. On Sundays he helps his dad to wash the truck, and to polish the shiny badge. “I've got it! I've got it!I know how to do it,” yells Doobie.
“You are full of surprises, Doobie,” says Duksie sweetly. “How did you work it out?” Maya asks. Doobie smiles to himself. For now it his secret. Later, he will tell his dad.
First he uses a knife to smooth Duksie's lines in the icing. Then he traces three lines on the cake. It looksjust like the badge on his dad's truck, with three equal parts.
Just then Mama K comes out of her house. She is carrying a tray with three glasses of cold strawberry juice. “Look Mama K! Doobie found the way to cut the cake into three equal pieces,” Maya tells her. “Well done Doobie,three equal slices! You shared fairly, I'm proud of you all. Now cut the cake and drink your juice. It's time to go home. I will give you plates to take your pieces of cake.”
Maya cuts along Doobie's lines to make three equal slices. Just for fun, the children stack the slices on top of each other to check that they are the same size. Yes they are!
Doobie's dad arrives to pick up the children, and Doobie runs off to meet him. He can't wait to tell his dad how the badge on the truck helped him to solve a very tricky problem!
How many cats? 0 Zero cats.
How many cats? 1 One cat.
How many cats? 2 Two cats.
How many cats? 3 Three cats.
How many cats? 4 Four cats.
How many cats? 5 Five cats.
How many cats? 6 Six cats.
How many cats? 7 Seven cats.
How many cats? 8 Eight cats.
What is this we see? A kitten is stuck in a tree! "I will rescue you!"
"Mama,  can we keep him? Just one more!" How many cats? 9 Nine cats.
Zama is getting ready for school.
Dad is cooking porridge for breakfast. He mixes it with milk.
"Mummy has got the sweetest breast milk!" says Zama.
Milk has got fats, vitamins, calcium which gives Zama alot of energy for school.
The milk is ready.
Dad pours the milk,  with love.
"Dad,  I think this porridge needs more sugar and milk," says Zama.
"Mummy's milk tastes much better than Dad's milk," says Zama.
"Dad,  please in this milk asks Zama."
Dad adds sugar to Zama's milk.
"Wu! Dad! You added water in my milk!"
"Dad,  when will Mom be home?" asks Zama.
“Niyakwati yini lekwenteka ngeLusuku lweLusha ngemnyaka wanga 1976?” Gogo ubuta ebatukulu bakhe, Buhle naVusi.“Kwenteka umlandvo ngamhla ti- 16 Inhlaba ngemnyaka wanga 1976 eSoweto!” Kusho gogo.
“Bekusekuseni ngamhla ti- 16 Inhlaba ngemnyaka wanga 1976. Bekumnyaka wami wekugcina esikolweni.Lelo lusuku lolwagucula umlandvo,” kuchubeka gogo.
“Sasibafundzi betikolo letahlukahlukene taseSoweto.Sasihlele kumasha sisuka etikolweni tetfu silibangise enkhundleni yetemidlalo i-Orlando.Sasihlele imashi lenekuthula.”
“Nanibhikishelani?” kubuta Buhle.Gogo uyachaza, “Umbuso welibandlululo bewusicindzetela kutsi sifundze ngelulwimi lweSibhunu, besingahambisani nalowo mtsetfo. Satfukutsela kakhulu!”
“Sayisukumela indzaba yekukhululeka kwebafundzi belibala lelimnyama eNingizimu Afrika.Phela besifuna imfundvo lencono kuwonkhewonkhe.Futsi nemfundvo lelinganayo kuwonkhewonkhe eNingizimu Afrika.”
“Kwase kwentekani?” kubuta Vusi.“Sasimasha silibangise emhlanganweni enkhundleni yetemidlalo i-Orlando. Tinkhulungwane tebafundzi tahlanganyela kulemashi. Sasijabule kakhulu!” kuphendvula gogo.
“Sisamasha njalo, emaphoyisa asihlasela!Asiphosa ngagesi lokhalisa tinyembeti. Tinja temaphoyisa tasihlasela!Setama kutfulisa sachubeka nekuhamba.”
“Bacala kudubula ngetinhlavu.Kunesitfombe lesidvumile lesatfusa umhlaba wonkhe.Sitfombe saHector Pieterson acukulwe ngumngani wakhe,” kusho gogo ngekudzabuka.
“Kwagcina njani gogo?” kubuta Buhle naVusi ngemavi laphasi.“Lombhikisho waseSoweto wabhebhetseka kulolonkhe live. Ebafundzi labanyenti nebasebenti bahlanganyela kulombhikisho.Ebantfu kuwo wonkhe umhlaba basekela lombhikisho,” kuphendvula gogo.
“Lolutfutfuva lwaseSoweto lwalubalulekile ekulweni nelubandlululo. Sabita lelosuku ngekutsi ‘Lusuku lwaseSoweto’. Laba liholide lemphakatsi lavelonkhe ngemnyaka wanga 1995,” gogo utjela Buhle naVusi.Ngabo 1990, kwaba nemibhikisho lemikhulu yetibhelu telusha,” kukhumbula gogo.
“NgeLusuku lweLusha lwaVelonkhe, ebantfu baseNingizimu Afrika bahlonipha ebantfu labasha lababulawa kulombhikisho wemnyaka wanga 1976.”“Sikhumbula ebantfu labasha labasita kucedza lubandlululo,” kusho gogo ngekutigcabha.
“Yonkhe iminyaka ngeLusuku lweLusha kuba khona imicimbi, imihlangano nemakhonsethi eveni lonkhe.Kufanele singawukhohlwa umlandvo welive letfu,” kusho gogo aphetsa indzaba.Uyamamatseka ugona Buhle naVusi.
Rremogolo o bogetse Letsatsi la Poelano mo thelebišeneng kwa lapeng.“Rremogolo, Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK) ke eng?” Gone poelano ke eng?” ga botsa Puseletso.“O botsa dipotso di le dintsi ka nako e le nngwe. Reetsa, ke go rute!” ga bua rremogolo.
MK e ne e le batlhabani ba ANC. Ba ne ba lwantsha puso ya tlhaolele. Tlhaolele e ne e kgetholola batho Bantsho,”ga tlhalosa rremogolo.Gompieno batho ba itumetse ka gonne ke letsatsi la tshwarelano le poelano,” a bua.
“A o gakologelwa fa o ne o sa buisane le Dikeledi beke yotlhe?” Ga botsa rremogolo.Puseletso a koma ka tlhogo.“Ka bonya lo ne lwa nna ditsala gape?”Puseletso a koma gape ka tlhogo.“Eo ke yona maitshwarelano le poelano,”ga ngeba rremogolo.
“Letsatsi la 16 Sedimonthole ke letsatsi la maitshwarelano le poelano,” rremogolo a tswelelapele.“Letsatsi le, le na hisitori e telele. Kgang e simolola ka ntwa e e neng ya diragala bogologolo ka la 16 Sedimonthole 1838.”
“Ka letsatsi leo mo hisitoring, batlhabani ba Kgosi Dingane wa MaZulu le MaVoortrekkere ba ne ba lwa ntwa e kgolo gaufi le noka ya Ncome.”“Go ne ga fenya mang?” ga botsa Puseletso.
Rremogolo a araba, “MaVoortrekker ba ne ba fenya.Ke nako e telele ba keteka phenyo e ka la 16 Sedimonthole. Ba le bitsa Letsatsi la Maikano.
Jaanong, ka 1962 ka la 16 Sedimonthole, Umkhonto we Sizwe o ne wa tlhamiwa.E ne e le masole a ANC a a neng e ikemiseditse go lwantsha puso ya tlhaolele.
“Rremogolo, tota ke eng se se neng sa tlhotlheletsa Umkhonto we Sizwe go lwa morago ga dinyaga tse dintsi tsa tlhaolele?” ga botsa Puseletso.“Go ne go na le mabaka a mmalwanyana. Se se diragetseng kwa mogwantong wa Didompas, e ne e le lebaka le le golo,” ga bua rremogolo.“Dompas ke eng?” ga botsa Puseletso.
Rremogolo a araba, “Dompas ke pasa ya bogologolo. Batho Bantsho botlhe ba ne ba pateletswa go rwala pasa e.“Ka 1960, ka mogwanto wa kagiso wa go gana go rwala dipasa, maphodisa a ne a tlhasela bagwanti. Maphodisa a tlhaolele a ne a bolaya gape a gobatsa batho, kwa Sharpville mo Gauteng.”
“Dikgotlhang tsa bogologolo di ne di kgaogantse batho Basweu le batho Bantsho,” rremogolo a busa mowa.“Botsala bo ka agiwe fela mo godimo ga nnete. Go tshwanetse go itsewe gore go ne go diragetse eng magareng ga batho Basweu le batho Bantsho ka ntlha ya tlhaolele,” a bua.
“A mme go bonolo go tshwarelana morago ga dintwa tse di kana?” ga botsa Puseletso.“Nnyaa! Ga go bonolo. Fela, gore re tswelele pele, tshwarelano le poelano di botlhokwa magareng ga batho,” rremogolo a araba.“Poelano ga e tle ka bonako. Poelano e tsaya nako e telele,” a tlaleletsa.
“Fa mongwe a dirile phoso, o tshwanetse a bua nnete, mme a kopa maitshwarelo mo mothong yo o mo diretseng phoso. Morago ga moo, ba ka simolola go siamisa botsalano ba bona,” ga tlhalosa rremogolo.“O ne o reeditse sentle. A re bogele se o ratang go se bogela mo thelebišeneng!”ga ngeba rremogolo.
This is cat.This is dog.
Cat and Dog look through the window.They look through the window.
Then Cat and Dog see a butterfly!The butterfly is pink.
Cat and Dog want to catch the butterfly.Cat and Dog follow the butterfly.They follow the butterfly.
Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by foot. They walk after the butterfly.But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is too fast and Cat and Dog are slow. They are too slow.
Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by bike. They ride after the butterfly.But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is very fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are very slow.
Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by car. They drive after the butterfly.But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is still too fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are still too slow.
Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by boat. They float after the butterfly.But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is super-fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are still super-slow.
Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by plane. They fly after the butterfly.But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is still super-super-fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are still super-super-slow.
Then Cat and Dog stop. They stop and sit down. They sit down at a tree.They sit down at a big tree.But then...
They see one butterfly in the tree.They see two butterflies in the tree.They see three butterflies in the tree.
They see a hundred butterflies!
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye Dog.Bye bye butterflies.
The Izinzawu family was a happy family. The two girls learned cooking and gardening from theirmother. The two boys wentout with their father to hunt.
At dinner time every day, they talked about what they had done that day.
The father usually warned the children not to go deep into the forest. He told the family about a strange creature that lived in theforest. "This creature is like two of us put together!"
One day, the girls were playing at the river. Suddenly, from behind a tree, there was a strange creature! The creature hadtwo eyes, two ears, two arms, and two legs.
Shaking with fear, they ran to tell their brothers about what they had seen. But the boys didn't believe them, "The girls are being silly!" they said.
Eventually, curiosity got the better of the boys. They followed the girls to the river to see this strange creature for themselves.
They searched and searched but all they could see was the tall grass and trees.Suddenly, they heard a noise, and looked up.
Up on a tree swung the strangest creature they had ever seen. It had two arms, two hands, two legs and two feet. Instead of only one each, like them.
The frightened children ran home to call their parents. Soon the whole family was at the river to see this creature.
"Don't hurt me!" the creature said, as it hid behind the tree. Now the family could only see the creature's one foot, one leg, one hand, one arm and one eye.
"I am just like you,"continued the creature. "The only difference is that I was made with two of almost everything."
So this was how the Izinzawu family discovered that it was not a creature to be scared of. It was simply a different form of them.
One day,  Rabbit was walking by the riverside.
Hippo was there too,  going for a stroll and eating some nice green grass.
Hippo didn't see that Rabbit was there and she accidentally stepped on Rabbit's foot. Rabbit started screaming at Hippo,  "You Hippo! Can't you see that you're stepping on my foot?"
Hippo apologised to Rabbit,  "I'm so sorry. I didn't see you. Please forgive me!" But Rabbit wouldn't listen and he shouted at Hippo,  "You did that on purpose! Someday,  you'll see! You're going to pay!"
Rabbit went to find Fire and said,  "Go,  burn Hippo when she comes out of the water to eat grass. She stepped on me!"  Fire answered,  "No problem,  Rabbit,  my friend. I'll do just what you ask."
Later,  Hippo was eating grass far from the river when,  "Whoosh!" Fire burst into flame. The flames began to burn Hippo's hair.
Hippo started to cry and ran for the water. All her hair was burned off by the fire. Hippo kept crying,  "My hair has burned in the fire! My hair is all gone! My beautiful hair!"
Rabbit was happy that Hippo's hair was burned. And to this day,  for fear of fire,  the hippo never goes far from the water.
“Bafundzi ngifuna kunicocela ngalomunye Sosayensi lobalulekile walapha emzansi Afrika,” kusho Thishela Mpilo“Lo Sosayensi wacala imphilo yakhe kulesinye setigodzi letincane tase Limpopo lowatsi kamuva waba nguSosayensi losetulu.”Thishela wachubeka watsi, “Khumbulani, iPhysiks iyisayensi yetemvelo lesuselwa etibalweni.”
Thishela uyachubeka, “Lichawe letfu lesayensi lesitawukhuluma ngalo lamuhla ngu Mmantsae Moche Diale.”“Watalelwa e Ga-Masemola lekuyindzawo lesemakhaya e Limpopo. Wafundza esikolweni i Sekobetlane Maphutha.”“Bekunemapali lamakhulu agesi lebeka fakwe adzabula ekhatsi lapha esigodzini sakubo. Kepha kulesigodzi sakubo bekute gesi.”
“Asengumtfwana abenenshisakalo yekwati ngemandla agesi nekutsi atfolakala njani. Abekakwati kutsi wonkhe umuntfu kufanele abe nemandla lanele agesi kute akhone kuhlangabetana netidzingo takhe.”Thishela waphumula kancane nendzaba yakhe wabuta, “Iyini leminye imitfombo yemandla agesi?”
“Emalahle angumtfombo lobalulekile. Sishisa emalahle kute sente gesi,” kusho Nhlavu.“Yebo, kepha umhlaba wetfu uphelelwa ngemalahle naleminye imitfombo yemandla agesi langakhoni kuphindze isebentiseke.“Lilanga nemoya imitfombo lengaphindza isebentiseke,” kungeta Sphe, nathishela wakhombisa kuvumelana naye ngenhloko.
Thishela wachubeka nendzaba yakhe, “Ebuncaneni Mmantsae bekakwati kutsi ufuna tindlela tekutsi wonkhe umutfu atfole gesi longabiti kakhulu futsi lohlobile atfolakale etikwe mitfombo lengaphindze isebentiseke.”“Wafundza tibalo nesifundvo seSayensi yetemvelo esikolweni, futsi abekayitsandza I physiks, abekakwati kutsi ufuna kufundza I Physiks eNyuvesi,” kwasho Thishela.
“Bantfu babuta Mmantsae, ‘Ucabanga kutsi yini lotayenta nge Physiks? Nje ungawutfola umsebenti?’ Bamcedza emandla.”“Ufundzele ticu tetesayensi etikweni letemfundvo, kute abe ngu thishela we Sayensi. Abekanenshisakalo futsi yeku fundza ngemitfombo yemandla agesi lengaphindza isebentiseke,” kusho Thishela.
“Thishela, ngubani umuntfu lebekabuke kuye Mmantsae njengelichawe lakhe ngalesosikhatsi?” kubuta Sphe.“Bekulidlanzana labomake lebebasebenta emkhakheni we physiks, futsi bebabancane kakhulu bomake belibala lelimnyama kuwo lomkhakha,” kuphendula Thishela.“Mmantsae usebente nabo Sosayensi labadvuna kuphela. Bekute bomake base Mzansi Afrika lebekangabuka kubo njengemachawe akhe ngaleso sikhatsi.
“Ngemuva kweminyaka leminyenti Mmantsae afundza waba ngu Profesa weteSayensi. Nyalo unguThishela nemcwaningi wase Nyuvesi,” thishela Mpillo utjela likilasi.“Ulichawe lawo wonkhe umuntfu longumake welibala lelimnyama loku sayensi, ikakhulu labaku Physiks.”“Wenta lucwaningo lolubalulekile,” kusho thishela.
Thishela wachaza, “Lucwaningo lwakhe lugcile ekutsini atfole tindlela tekutfola emandla latfolakala elangeni ngebunyenti, nekuwagcina lawo mandla.“Emandla elilanga lagciniwe angasentjentiswa kuniketa gesi etindzaweni tasemakhaya.”“Emandla agesi latfolakala elangeni awabiti kakhulu futsi ayaphindza asebentiseke.”
Thishela wabuta, “Ningakwati kungitjela kutsi kusho kutsini, lokungaphindze kusebentiseke nalokungeke kuphindze kusebentiseke?”“Emandla agesi langaphindze asebentiseke ngulamandla langapheli,” kusho Ntando.“Emandla agesi lawa langaphindzi asebentiseke ayaphela njengalawa emalahle langakhoni kuphindze asebentiseke,” kusho Vusiwe.
Sifundvo siyaphela.Thishela uyaphetsa, “Mmantsae uhola licembu lebancwaningi labacwaninga ngemandla agesi lohlobile nalaluhlata.”“Sifiso sabo ngalolucwaningo kukhicita emaseli langakhona kutsatsa emandla agesi lamanyenti elangeni awayise ebantfwini.”
Basacoca likilasi ebafundzi, Thishela Mpilo utsi, “Sifiso sa Professor Diale kubona bomake labanyenti bafundza I physiks. Nginelitsemba lekutsi linyenti lematfombatana lapha atawufundza tifundvo te Sayensi ne Tibalo!”“Kanjalo nebafana futsi!” kumamatseka Thishela.
——Leina la nkgonne ke Resego.O mogolo mo go nna ka dingwaga di le pedi.Ke nkgonne.
O nthusa go apara diaparo tsa sekolo mo mosong.
O tsamaya le nna go ya sekolong ka letsatsi le letsatsi.Mme gompieno ga a ikutlwe monate.
Nkgonne o a lwala.Ijoo! Ke ile go dira jang?Ga ke a itumela le eseng!
Mo tseleng go ya sekolong, ke ne ka kopane le Tumi.Re ne ra tsamaya mmogo.Se, se ne sa dira gore ke ikutlwe botokanyana.
Kwa sekolong morutabana o ne a nkopelela pina.Se, se ne sa dira gore ke itumele.
Ka nako ya go tshameka, Boipelo o ne a tshameka le nna.Se, se ne sa intumedisa tota!
Kwa bofelong jwa letsatsi ke ne ke le mosetsana yo o itumetseng mo sekolong.Ga ke kgone go itshoka go tlotlela nkgonne ka letsatsi la me!
This is Natabo. She has six brothers.
Her parents give her a small pot. She loves it.
One day her brothers break the pot.
Natabo cannot find her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away. She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Please come down," they ask.
Her brothers sing,  "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
I like my teacher very much.
She is beautiful. She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She braided her hair pretty nice.
She placed colorful beads in her hair.
The beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, could you please braid my hair just like my teacher's?
When I grow older, I will also place colorful beads on my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie,  Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can see the huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing. "There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone,  I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes,  12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says. "I like counting in 4s," says Duksie,  "it's quicker."  "I'm going to count in 3s,  just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look,  there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did you pack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asks the children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side,  to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see,  how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself,  "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen and get a surprise for the children!"
Back at the farm,  Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them,  "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what it I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what she might bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of yellow apples falls onto the table. "See,  I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children,  "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. The count: 2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  and 1 apple left over, Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next,  they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted.  "Yay!" shout the children."
Umhlangano waqhubeka naxasibeni kubonakala zingekho iindlovu.“Sizoqhuba nevoti noba zingekho iindlovu. Sizobeka inkosi namhlanje,” watsho uSikhova.
Izilwanyana zavotela ukuba inkosi kuzoba nguMpovani.UMpovani wavumela phezulu nakubeni heyi zothwala omxinzi.“Luxanduva olufaka umsebenzi omninzi,” waacinga.
Iindaba zoba uMpovani wenyulwe uba abeyinkosi zahamba ngokutshetsha.Zifikile ezindlebeni zenkosana yeendlovu.Yamcunukisa kakhulu inkosana.
Inkosana yeendlovu yaya kufuna ukudla ehlathini.Ngokuziqqaja, ngamakhulu amatshamba yayizazi uba inamandla futhi ingenandaba kwanampovani.Enoba heyihamba kumgade wazo na kakade, yona heyidlisela.
Ngamandla esiyinawo, inkosana isiphule isiphunzi kwaphuma iimpovani ezininzi!INkosi uMpovani uchola ithuba angene kuwo umboko.“Kumele uhloniphe wonke umntu,” watsho uMpovani eyiluma inkosana yeendlovu.
Inkosana yeendlovu yagxwala yacela utshweli ngelithi izokwenza kwasani exelwa nguMpovani mayingayibulali.Indlovu yagoduka itshwencile ingaphathanga kudla, suka zee mekenxe ezinye iindlovu zixakiwe uba kwenzekeni.Yachaza konke okuyehleleyo kunye nezethembiso azenze kuMpovani.
Ezinye iindlovu zagcobela ukuthola inkosana yazo iphila.Zangabi sabi nandaba nokulawula kwabo ke nguMpovani.Kanjalo ulawulo lucholwa zimbovani noba zincane.
This is Azizi. Azizi is my doll.
I like Azizi because he always smiles.
After I wake up I wash my face. Then I look for Azizi.
When I find Azizi I brush his hair.
When I eat breakfast I feed Azizi.
When I eat sweets I give one to Azizi.
But Azizi never eats his sweet. I wonder why!
I walk around the compound picking flowers.
I give a flower to Azizi. But he never says,  "Thank you."
I wash Azizi clean before my mother bathes me.
I dress Azizi in red because I love the colour red.
When I go to sleep,  I lay Azizi beside me.
The Izinzawu family was a happy family. The two girls learned cooking and gardening from their mother. The two boys went out with their father to hunt.
At dinner time every day,  they talked about what they had done that day.
The father usually warned the children not to go deep into the forest. He told the family about a strange creature that lived in the forest. "This creature is like two of us put together!"
One day,  the girls were playing at the river. Suddenly,  from behind a tree, there was a strange creature! The creature had two eyes,  two ears, two arms, and two legs.
Shaking with fear,  they ran to tell their brothers about what they had seen. But the boys didn't believe them,  "The girls are being silly!" they said.
Eventually,  curiosity got the better of the boys. They followed the girls to the river to see this strange creature for themselves.
They searched and searched but all they could see was the tall grass and trees. Suddenly,  they heard a noise,  and looked up.
Up on a tree swung the strangest creature they had ever seen. It had two arms, two hands, two legs and two feet. Instead of only one each,  like them.
The frightened children ran home to call their parents. Soon the whole family was at the river to see this creature.
"Don't hurt me!" the creature said,  as it hid behind the tree. Now the family could only see the creature's one foot,  one leg,  one hand,  one arm and one eye.
"I am just like you," continued the creature. "The only difference is that I was made with two of almost everything."
So this was how the Izinzawu family discovered that it was not a creature to be scared of. It was simply a different form of them.
In a tiny village of  Lumela, lives a little boy called Chipego.  Chipego lives with his father, mother and his  little sister Mutinta.  There is one more special member of the family, Pendo the cow. Chipego helps his father to look after Pendo in exchange for pocket money that he uses to buy books. Meet Chipego. He is 10 years old and in Grade 5 at the village school. Chipego always comes top of his class. "What's his secret?" his schoolmates ask themselves."He's excellent in reading and writing. How does he do it?" they wonder. Chipego tells them it is because he reads lots of books. While they waste their time doing nothing, he spends all his free time reading.
Chipego sometimes earns K80.00 a week in pocket money. He spends most of the pocket money on books at the second-hand book shop in his village.So how does Chipego earn enough pocket money for these books? Read on to find out.
Meet Pendo, the family's milking cow. She produces over 20 litres of milk per day. Chipego's father sells the milk.A cow needs food and water, and time to graze in the field. So each day after school, Chipego helps with this work. Chipego's father gives him pocket money for the work he does. And it is this money that Chipego saves to buy books each week.
First, Chipego gives Pendo a bunch of carrots. He gives her exactly eight carrots a day. Each day he picks the carrots from his father's vegetable garden, enough for a day at a time.You can work it out. You will find that Pendo eats nearly 60 carrots a week. Can you tell exactly how many?
After that, Chipego takes Pendo to graze in the fields. His father warned him to watch the time and give Pendo not  more than three quarters of an hour to graze.Pendo usually starts grazing at about14:15 hrs, so that Chipego can take her back to the milking shed at 15 hours. In winter when it gets dark earlier, Chipego may start grazing earlier, around 13:30 hrs.
Next Chipego gives Pendo water. Without water Pendo won't produce milk, no matter how much Chipego feeds her. Chipego fetches buckets of water from the village pump because there isn't one nearby.Pendo's trough holds about 30 litres of water. Chipego's bucket only holds 5 litres. So to fill the trough Chipego has to make many trips. Can you work out how many trips he has to make?
Then, Chipego takes Pendo to his father to get her daily 12 kg bag of grain. Chipego calculates that's almost 90 kg a week.Each bag costs K39.00. Chipego works out the cost of grain for each week. First he works out the cost of 7 bags at K40.00, which makes K280.00 Then he subtracts K7.00 to get K273.00 "That's over K1 000 a month!" Chipego estimates. Is he correct?
Chipego's father milks Pendo twice a day. She produces about 24 litres of milk a day, so about 12 litres for each milking.Sometimes Chipego helps with the milking but it is not as easy as it looks. "One day," he thinks to himself, "I will have my own cows and I will have to do all the milking myself."
His father pours the milk from the big bucket into smaller two litre cans or one litre bottles. He then sells the milk for K8.00 a litre.Once a week Chipego's father donates 25 litres of milk to Bulela School feeding scheme. Each child gets a quarter litre of this milk. That means that 100 children get milk on this day.
For each litre of milk sold, his father gives Chipego 50 ngwee. That doesn't sound like a lot, but if his father sells 24 litres a day, it adds up to quite a bit. Can you tell how much?Chipego saves his money until Saturday when he makes a trip to the book shop. Each book costs less than k10.00, so in a good week, he can buy quite a few.
Chipego also loves to drink Pendo's milk. His father says that milk helps to build strong bones and teeth and makes a person fit and healthy.So by drinking milk and eating lots of vegetables from his father's garden, Chipego is strong and healthy. He seldom gets sick and never goes hungry. His mother loves making mabisi using Pendo's milk too. His young sister enjoys adding the milk to her chibwantu! Hmmm! Yummy!
Chipego never forgets to thank Pendo at the end of each day. He rewards her with extra carrots or spinach leaves that he finds lying around the garden."Thank you Pendo, you are my best friend! It is thanks to you that I am strong, healthy and clever. If not for you I would never be able to buy all the books that help me be top of my class." One day I will be a veterinary  doctor because of you!Pendo is very lucky because Mutinta, Chipego's mother and Father also rewards her! What an amazing cow!
It is hot sunny Saturday morning on the farm. Maya,  Duksie and Doobie are helping Mama K in her vegetable garden. The children work all morning. They dig compost into the soil. They weed and water. Then they harvest what is ripe and ready. Today each of the children will take home freshly picked strawberries,  spinach and carrots.
Mama K always gives the children a treat for helping her. Sometimes its cake or chocolate,  or she buys long sweets that look like snakes. Sometimes it's apples,  pears or oranges. Mama K has only one rule. "Share it fair!" The children know they must share the treats equally,  so they all get the same amount.
Today Mama K has baked a round strawberry cake with pink icing and berries from her garden. The children wait on the grass for their treat. "Here you go!" smiles Mama K. "But remember the rule. Everyone must get the same. Share it fair! Don't fight!"
Maya has the first turn to share the cake. She uses the knife to trace lines in the icing. The others watch her. She does not cut the cake yet. The others must first agree if her way is fair. "I think I will make two cuts down like this. Now we have three slices,  all the same!" Maya shows them.
"No way!" says Duksie,  "the one in the middle is much too big!" Doobie also shakes his head. Maya laughs and shrugs and tells Duksie to try.
"Here! Pass me the knife,  I'll do it. Easy peasy!" chants Duksie. First she rubs out Maya's pattern in the icing and licks her fingers.
Then she makes one cut across and one down. "Look,  I made my three slices!" "That's not fair!" shout Maya and Doobie together.
"Share it fair! The pieces must be the same size and shape," adds Doobie. "Why don't you try Doobie,  Smarty Pants?" smirks Duksie. "I bet you can't do it!"
"I wish the cake was a square or a rectangle,  and then it would be easy!" says Doobie thoughtfully. "Or,  if there were four of us to share the round cake that would also be easy," says Maya.
And then! A picture comes into Doobie's head. He sees the sparkling silver badge at the front of his father's big red truck. On Sundays he helps his dad to wash the truck,  and to polish the shiny badge. "I've got it! I've got it! I know how to do it," yells Doobie.
First he uses a knife to smooth Duksie's lines in the icing. Then he traces three lines on the cake. It looks just like the badge on his dad's truck,  with three equal parts.
"You are full of surprises,  Doobie," says Duksie sweetly. "How did you work it out?" Maya asks. Doobie smiles to himself. For now it is his secret. Later, he will tell his dad.
Just then Mama K comes out of her house. She is carrying a tray with three glasses of cold strawberry juice. "Look Mama K! Doobie found the way to cut the cake into three equal pieces," Maya tells her. "Well done Doobie,  three equal slices! You shared fairly,  I'm proud of you all. Now cut the cake and drink your juice. It's time to go home. I will give you plates to take your pieces of cake."
Maya cuts along Doobie's lines to make three equal slices. Just for fun,  the children stack the slices on top of each other to check that they are the same size. Yes they are!
Doobie's dad arrives to pick up the children,  and Doobie runs off to meet him. He can't wait to tell his dad how the badge on the truck helped him to solve a very tricky problem!
This is Jaaka the fisherman from Naminya.
He fishes on the river Nile.
He has a boat,  fishing net and a hook.
He always wakes up very early in the morning to catch the Nile perch.
At around 10am,  he's selling his catch in Jinja central market.
Jaaka what happened? Was it a loss? He's so sad.
"Today the situation is bad. The Nile breeze did not permit me to fish. And one perch swam away with my hook."
"But I have hope that tomorrow will be good,  because I've bought a new hook."
Kwakulusuku olutshisa kakhulu. UDada wankcwila emanzini. UHobe wayecinga, “Ingathi kumandi ukugqubha.”“Hobe, uyakhanuka ukugqubha?” watsho uDada etshonisa intloko emanzini, aphinde avumbuke, emfila.“Yiza ndikubeleke, ndikufundise ukugqubha.”
UHobe shwiii wabaleka wayoma phezu komthi xa kufuneka etshonise intloko emanzini.UHobe wacinga ngokukhiyanxeka, “Ngeke ndikwazi ukugqubha njengoDada.”Wasala yena uDada emanzini.
“O yhini Hobe! Undijaliselani? Kutheni unditshiya ndodwa emanzini? Bendithi ngaba uba uyakukhanuka ukugqubha njengam,” wakhalaza uDada.UHobe waaphendula, “Ndoyika ukutshona.”“Bendicinguba ubufuna ukufunda ukugqubha njengam,” watsho uDada.
“Tswi Tswi! Tswi! Dada, nam mandikufundise ukubhabhazela. Ukugqubha kunzima!”Shwiii! Wabhabhazela uHobe wayoma etyeni elikhulu. Walandela uDada.Nanko uHobe phezu komthi omde. Wasala engakwazi ukulandela uDada.
UDada waziva ekhiyanxekile. Wazicingela engxamile, “Hayibo kutheni! UHobe akandicingeli.Mna ndilidada hayi ihobe. Mna ndiqhele ukugqubha andikuqhelanga ukubhabhazela,” waacinga nzulu engxamile.UHobe wafuna ukumduduza umnganakhe.
Baahlala phantsi elityeni bethule.Ekugqibeleni uHobe wathi, “Mngani, namhlanje ndifunde uba noba ndikhanuka, ngeke ndigqubhe njengwawe,” watsho uHobe.“Nam Hobe undifundise isifundo. Mawubhabhazela undenza ndikhanuke ukuba nguwe. Kodwa ndibonile namhlanje uba idada lahlukile kwintaka.”Bawolana uDada noHobe.
“Singamadada, thina singamadada. Siyaluthand’udaka, ma sigqubh’echibini, sitshonisa iintloko, siphume sesisithi, ‘Kwaa kwaa kwaa gxadada! Kwaa kwaa kwaa gxadada!’”“Hanibheke ezo ntakana. Zibhabhazela ngamaphikwana zithi, ‘Tsiyoyo, tsiyoyo, tsiyoyo!’”
This is Cat. This is Dog.
Cat and Dog want to draw. Cat and Dog want to colour. Cat and Dog want to make art. Dog starts.He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a square.
First Dog draws an oval. The oval is the body of Cat.Wow, that is simple!
Then he draws two triangles on top of the oval.The two triangles are the ears of Cat and he draws a black triangle in the oval. The black triangle is the nose of Cat and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of Cat.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is easy!
Then he draws the mouth of Cat. The mouth is a line.It looks like the letter ‘w’ and he draws the hairs of Cat. Three hairs on the left side and three hairs on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Cat. The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Cat.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Cat. The tail is a long line.
At last he draws some stripes on the body of Cat and he colours the body orange. Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is beautiful!
Now it is Cat's turn. He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a rectangle.
First Cat draws an oval. The oval is the body of Dog.Wow, that is good!
Then he draws two black forms on top of the oval.The two black forms are the ears of Dog and he draws a black circle in the oval.The black circle is the nose of Dog and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of dog.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is perfect!
Then he draws the mouth of Dog. The mouth is a line. The shape is again the letter ‘w’ and he draws some dots around the mouth of Dog. Three on the left side and three on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Dog.The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Dog.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Dog.The tail looks like a flower.
At last he draws some black circles on the body of Dog and he colours the body yellow.Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is wonderful!
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye drawing of Cat.Bye bye Dog.Bye bye drawing of Dog.
Big-head Ant was a good farmer.He lived in the ground with his family.
They worked very hard on their farm.Ant's family lived well.
Pigeon was Ant's neighbour. Pigeon lived in a tree with her family.
Pigeon and her family did not farm.They rested all day.
Pigeon and her family were very good singers.
"Share your food?" Pigeon asked Ant."No! Go and farm!" replied Ant.
Pigeon flew down and began to sing, "Ant is king!"
"Ant is king! Ant is king! Ant is king!"Ant loved this song.
After they ate, Pigeon and her family flew up to their tree.
The next day, Pigeon mocked Ant. "Do kings have big heads?" she laughed.
"You are ungrateful and lazy!" complained Ant.
"I am sorry!" said Pigeon, and began to sing, "Ant is king!"
Lynne, Oupa Karel and Anton were getting things ready for Lynne's birthday party.
Anton and Lynne are going to bake a cake. Oupa Karel reads the recipe.
"Let's mix these ingredients in the big bowl," said Lynne.
Anton stirred the ingredients and made a big mess.
"The cake feels heavy now," said Oupa Karel.
"Your friends have arrived," said Oupa Karel.
Anton thought the first present would be heavy because it was big.
It was a pillow and it weighed very little.
Anton thought the next present would be light because it was small.
It was a painted rock and it weighed a lot.
The children said that 1 kilogram of rocks weighs the same as 1 kilogram of feathers.
Lynne's cake was burnt.
Lynne was very sad.
Auntie Mavis asked Anton to guess how much her present weighed.
"It weighs the same as the cake that burned," said Anton.
Everyone said, "happy birthday, Lynne."
We used to stay with my Grandma and mom.
My cousins, Christina, Thandi, Junior and Aunty lived with us.
My Grandma would teach us games. It was a good time.
Then, Junior went to Malawi, and Grandma went to Malawi.
And Aunty and Christina went to Malawi.
And then Thandi went to Malawi.
It was really sad.No one would stay with us.
But it is not so bad, because my mother is still here with me.
Hare owned a donkey and a small red basin.
When Hare needed a big basin, he borrowed Hyena's blue basin.
Hyena wanted to wash his clothes in his basin.
"Your basin had a baby," said Hare. Hyena took both basins.
Another day,  Hare borrowed Hyena's basin again.
When Hyena went to get his basin, Hare had bad news.
Hyena called the big animals to decide the truth.
"Things that live and give birth, also die," explained Hare.
Nestled in the Kingdom of the Zulu is a magnificent place called the Valley.
A little girl called Jabulile lives here. Jabulile was always a happy child. She was also curious, and full of questions about life.Everything fascinated her.
Jabulile’s father was a mielie farmer.Her mother was a teacher. They taught her to dream big dreams. Jabulile’s biggest dream was to help people.
One awful day, the clouds began to gather over the Valley. Everything grew dark and grey. An ugly storm swept over the land.
Great gusts of wind blew the roofs off the huts. All the animals lost their homes. It was a very sad day.
The village folk cried, “What shall we do now?”“All the crops are ruined!” cried the farmers. “Our homes are gone!” said the elders. All hope seemed lost. But Jabulile remembered something her wise father once told her.
Jabulile started speaking to the villagers.“The storm only hurts us,” she said, “because of the way we choose to see it. If you look up, the sun is shining again. It is a new day.“After every storm, there must be a rainbow!” she shouted excitedly.
The villagers saw the rainbow and they began to smile. It stood as a promise that the storm was over.
The villagers rebuilt their homes. Farmers planted new crops. The grass grew greener than ever before.
Once again there was hope and happiness in the Valley.
UBongani wazalwa ngonyaka we 1967, eMthatha kwelase Mpuma Koloni, eMzantsi Afrika.Wafunda isikolo kwilali yase Ngqamakhwe.Umama ka Bongani wayengumongikazi, kwaye utata wakhe engugqirha.
Ekupheleni kwemini, yonke imihla, abazali baka Bongani babedla ngokuthetha ngomsebenzi wabo.Wabanomdla ngeengxaki zempilo, nokunceda abantu.Ngokuva ngomsebenzi wabazali bakhe, uBongani waba nomdla kwiNzululwazi yeze Mpilo.
Esikolweni, uBongani wayezithanda izifunda zakhe zeziBalo kwa nezobuNzululwazi yeZempilo.Wayesebenza nzima kwezo zifundo kuba wayefuna ukuba ngugqirha.Emva kokugqiba amabanga akhe aphezulu esikolweni, wayokufunda kwiDyunivesithi ya KwaZulu-Natal neyase Kapa. Waba ngumfundi ogqwesileyo.
Ngenxa yobukrelekrele bakhe, uBongani wachongwa. Wafumana inkxaso-mali wayokuqhubekeka ngemfundo kwiDyunivesithi yaseOxford, eNgilani.Wafunda nase Melika. Waze wabuyela eMzantsi Afrika ukusebenza njengo gqirha.Hayi madoda! UMayosi wayengugqirha onobubele nothobekileyo, futhi obathanda kakhulu abantu.
Kuthe kungekudala, uBongani watyelela phesheya kwakhona.Wayefuna ukufunda ngakumbi malunga nentliziyo.IKhadiyoloji zizifundo zentliziyo, kwakunye nezifo ezithi zihlasele intliziyo.UBongani wayeyi Khadiyolojist – ugqirha wentliziyo.
UGqr Mayosi wayesebenza nabanye abaphandi baphesheya, kwaye bafumanisa into eyayibaluleke kakhulu.Aba baphandi bafumanisa ukuba kutheni abanye abantu besiba nesifo sentliziyo.Oku kufumanisa kwakubalulekile koogqirha umhlaba wonke jikelele.
UBongani wabuyela eMzantsi Afrika nolwazi lweengcali kwezonyango.Wasebenza noMphathiswa wezempilo waze wanika neengcebiso ngeengxaki zempilo zelizwe.Iphupha likaBongani lalingelokuba izwekazi i-Afrika, likwazi ukusombulula iingxaki zempilo ngokusebenzisa iNzululwazi.
UBongani wayezithemba njenge Nzululwazi yase Afrika. Uphando akalufumanisayo lwalulolubalulekileyo kwihlabathi lonke.UMzantsi Afrika wabhiyozela umsebenzi kwanempumelelo yakhe.Yiva ke! Ngenxa yokusebenza kakhulu, ukuzinikela nokuphanda nzulu kwezeNzululwazi, wathiwa jize ngewonga eliphakamileyo lelizwe, elibizwa uMyalelo weMaphungubwe
UBongani wayenguNjingalwazi kwicandelo leNtliziyo kwiDyunivesithi yaseKapa (UCT).Kwimfundiso zakhe, wayesabelana ngolwazi lwakhe kubafundi bakhe.Wayeziqonda iingxaki zabafundi abaninzi. Wabakhuthaza oogqirha abaselula nabanye ababesafundela iNzululwazi Zempilo.
UNjingalwazi uMayosi waphinda wonyuselwa njengeNtloko yeNzululwazi Zempilo eUCT.Wayesoloko exakekile ngomsebenzi wakhe. Wayengu titshala, umphandi, kwane nkokheli.UBongani Mayosi ukhunjulwa njenge sibonelo ngabantu abaninzi.
Inkwenkwana esuka ezilalini nakumaxethuka aseNgqamakhwe, yaba yinkokeli kwiNzululwazi yeZempilo kwenye yeDyunivesithi eziphakamileyo eMzantsi Afrika.Waba yincutshe yezeNzululwazi kwezeMpilo kumhlaba wonke jikelele.UBongani uphumelele izinto ezininzi ebomini ingakumbi imfundo, kodwa wayesoloko ethobekile.
Xa sifunda ngezeNzululwazi, singacinga ngo Gqr Mayosi.Singayibhiyozela impumelelo yakhe kwanaleyo yeeNzululwazi ezininzi zase Afrika.Kwaye singabhiyozela nexabiso lolwazi lwase Afrika.
One day Little Dog was playing with a ball.
He saw a cat. He said,  "Hello,  Little Cat. Can I play with you?" Little Cat said,  "I will play with you. Can I play with your ball?"
"Yes," said Little Dog. "It is a red ball. I will kick it to you and you can hit it back to me."
So the two little friends began to play. Little Dog said,  "I like to play with you. It is fun. You are a good friend."
The big red ball went over the wall. Little Cat began to cry. "We do not have a ball to play with."
"I like to play with the big red ball," said Little Cat. Little Cat began to cry and cry.
"I will get the ball," said Little Dog and he jumped over the wall.
Soon he was back with the ball. Little Cat was happy that it was back. The two friends played and played.
Little Dog said,  "Come to my house and let us look at a picture book." In the picture book,  they saw a little dog play ball with a little cat!
My village has goats. It is far from big cities.
Mother said, "Zainab, we have a present for your sixth birthday."
Mother, aunt and I waited for the bus.
I sat on mother’s lap. I slept the whole way.
We reached the market. I saw a beautiful blue helicopter.
One stall had fruits. I asked mother, “Which ones are these?”
Mother said, “These are apples.” I begged, “Please, buy me one.”
I forgot my mother’s hand. I thought only of my apple.
When I finished eating, I was alone. I started to cry.
A woman took me where there were other children.
I thought children were sold at the market. I cried more.
A man asked, "Where is Zainab?"I hid away from him.
My mother's familiar voice called, "Zainab!" I was very happy.
My aunt pulled out a beautiful helicopter. "It's yours!" she said.
One day a very clever baby was born in Gungululu in the Eastern Cape. Her name was Sindiwe Magona. She was the oldest of eight children.
At night, her grandmother told magical stories about ogres and giants, animals of the forests, great beasts, and little creatures of the veld. It was Sindiwe’s favourite time.
Sindiwe loved school and she dreamed about being a teacher.
When Sindiwe became a teenager, her family organised a feast to celebrate. She was given special things to wear and a wise old man sang a praise song to her. (Blessings, long life! May your ancestors guard you!)
Sindiwe trained to be a teacher. She was very excited to teach at her first school. But there weren’t enough schools for black children and they had no desks or books to write in. This made Sindiwe feel scared. How could she be a good teacher when the children had nowhere to sit?
She left the school to work as a cleaner.She worked in four different houses. Sometimes the people there treated her badly and Sindiwe became very unhappy.
All this time Sindiwe studied. Her hard work paid off! She won a scholarship to study at a university in New York. She and her three small children packed their bags and flew across the sea to the United States of America.
In New York, Sindiwe studied to become a social worker. She wanted to help families make their lives better.
When she finished studying, the United Nations gave Sindiwe a job. Most of the countries in the world meet at the United Nations to talk about their problems.
Sindiwe told the world about South Africa, and how hard it was for black people living there. The people at the United Nations loved to listen to Sindiwe’s stories. They wanted to learn more and more about South Africans. Perhaps, together, they could help to change things in South Africa.
She worked at the United Nations for twenty years while her children grew into adults. But Sindiwe missed the country where she was born. She wanted to tell her stories to the people at home.So she packed her luggage, got on a plane and flew back over the sea to Cape Town.
Sindiwe’s love for books and stories have helped her write piles and piles of books. And children and grown-ups love to read her stories. Many people call her Nomabali because she’s always writing, telling and reading stories.
Every day when eight-year-old Sisanda gets home from school,  she changes out of her uniform,  eats her lunch and plays a game of umlabalaba with her grandfather. They have so much fun flying their "cows" around the board that she doesn't want to stop. But then he reminds her that she wants to become a bank manager one day when she grows up.
For her last birthday,  Sisanda had a special treat – her parents got permission for her to have a party at the game reserve. The giraffes at the reserve were curious about this group of people. They stretched out their long necks for the best view of the party and they even seemed to want some of the birthday cake! Sisanda loved the giraffes. All animals were special to her,  but it was the quiet and gentle giraffes that stole her heart. She could spend all day watching them.
"Oh no!" said Sisanda starting to cry. "I wish there was something I could do. The baby giraffe must be crying just like me." Sisanda cried and cried. Her mother tried to comfort her. She even read Sisanda an extra story at bedtime to help her forget how sorry she felt for that baby giraffe. Eventually,  Sisanda drifted off to sleep to the sound of her mama's voice.
They found the baby giraffe standing alone. His willowy neck drooped and his big brown eyes looked dull. Sisanda stood as close to him as she could. She opened her small bag and took out a book. Then,  to her parents' surprise,  she began to read to the baby giraffe. He turned his head towards her voice and listened as if he could understand every word. At first,  Sisanda's parents thought reading to a giraffe was a strange thing to do,  but they changed their minds when they saw how peaceful he looked − his gentle eyes looking at Sisanda.
On the day of the outing,  forty Grade 3 children waited eagerly for the reserve gates to open. Then Sisanda proudly led everyone to Thokozani. Some of the children looked at the tall giraffe in amazement. Others giggled nervously. Their teacher,  Miss Khanyile,  just smiled.
I saw a big truck driving down the road.
A car came driving up the road.
The truck driver was talking on his cellphone.
He was not looking at the road.
There was a big accident.
An ambulance and the police came to help.
Two tow trucks came. They towed the truck and the car.
I was shocked.
Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.
The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.
Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find the right man.
Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. This herb would heal her father's wound. But the lake was filled with dangerous spirits.
Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. Some men did not return from the lake at all.
Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" But Nangila had made up her mind.
On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."
When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.
Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived into the lake. She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.
When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She was afraid, but she sang the song the old woman taught her: I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here, in the land where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers.
Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.
Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. The entire village danced and praised Nangila.
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means "daughter of the people of Kanyada." She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. "First open my gift," said Odongo. "No, my gift first!" said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar-Kanyada. She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them,  they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, "I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again."
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village.   Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
Once upon a time, there was a young man called Pontshibobo. When he was little he was a very good boy. He had grown into a very good man. He respected everybody he met.
Pontsihibobo had a friend called Hippo. He was not respectful like Pontshibobo. One day Pontshibobo and Hippo were walking down the street together. Hippo had an idea, “Let's go and smoke a zol,” he said.
Pontshibobo was surprised. “Why do you ask me to smoke with you? You know that I don't smoke.”
Hippo got cross. “If you don't want to smoke with me you can't be my friend,” he said and walked off. Pontshibobo went home and sat under the tree in his yard and cried.
“Why are you crying?” asked the tree. Pontshibobo got a huge fright. He had never heard a tree talking before. He told the tree about Hippo. “I have lost a friend,” he said.
The tree asked Pontshibobo, “What do you really wish for?” Pontshibobo thought for a while. Then he replied, “I want a house. I am grown up now and I want a home. I want to marry and have children.”
The tree also thought for a while. “Take my leaves and my branches and build yourself a house with them,” he said. Pontshibobo did as the tree told him and he built a small, beautiful house. He married and had children. He was happy.
But the tree was not happy. Pontshibobo had forgotten all about him and he felt sad. “I need a friend,” the tree said to himself, “or else I will die.” Just at that moment Pontshibobo came into the yard. He heard what the tree said, and he saw that the tree was very sick.
Pontshibobo was also sad. He had forgotten all about the tree that had helped him build a house for his wife and children. “I am so sorry,” he cried and gave the tree a big hug.
When the tree saw that his friend was back he smiled. He grew new branches and fresh leaves.
Pontshibobo's children climbed up the branches of the tree. Pontshibobo and his wife sat in the shade after a long day at work. They told stories and laughed and were happy. Pontshibobo and the tree were friends forever.
Bobabini hebengabangani abakhulu hebehlukene kakhulu.UNonjana hekuthanda ukulala, ukudla engathembeki.Kanti yena uKatana helungile, enokubele futhi engumngani ongamthemba.Yeyonto eyadalukuba batshube kwelokuba bayolalisa kwaNonjana, khonukuze baxele ngohambo lwabo.
Wathi uNonjana, “Mna ndizophatha ukudla kwemini yokuqala.”“Mna ndophatha ukudla kwemini yesibini,” watsho uKatana evuma.Baabhala oko phantsi khonukuze bangaliballi.
“Kuzobamandi kusasa masimbona umngani wethu uNkukhu, kaade samtshubela,” watsho uNonjana ekhapha umnganakhe ejika ebuyela endlinakhe.“Ndiyabonga ngokundikhapha mngan’am,” kutsho uKatana.
Ekuseni baayiqala indlela.Endleleni hebejabule, becula amaculo bedantsa.Baafika emthini bachopha phantsi. “Chaka ndilambile,” watsho uKatana kuNonjana.
UNonjana waakhipha umxhafuxhafu kokudla.Wakhipha izikotile ezimbini waqala ukuchaka ukudla loo nyavunyavu ngokutshetsha.‘’Kukudla kwethu oku?” waabuza uKatana ecunuka ngenyani.Zeyimtshincile into yoba umnganakhe ephule izigqibo. Waaphutsha ke ngoku yilento.
“Ulindeni?” waabuza uNonjana eqalisa esidla.“Kutheni wathwala ukudla kwakho wedwa?”waacunuka watsho uKatana.UNonjana waqhubeka wadla. Esadla kanjalo, nangenxa yokuphanga namafutha ayegcwele isandla sakhe, satshibilika isikotile sawa phantsi.Ukudla konke kwachitheka kowo mhlaba bebehleli kuwo.
“Kulungile ke mnganam,” watsho uKatana.UKatana waakhipha amakhekhe amahle kweyakhe ingxiwa wadla.Ngoyonkxetsha, uNonjana hebheke ukudla kuka Katana ngamehlo arhalayo.Xa uKatana egqibile ukudla wapakisha. “Singaqhubeka nendlela?”
Ukususela ngoko ke beemka bedle imu kolo hambo lonke. Isisu sikaNonjana sasifundekela.Ngobo busuku, uKatana wazichakela ukudla kwakhe walala, egcobile kuba eziphathele ukudla okwaneleyo.UNonjana walala engadlanga.
Ngosuku olulandelayo, uKatana wadla intwana yokudla phambi koba bahambe. UNonjana herhala engakwazi nokuzigola emana ebheka ukudla kukaKatana.UKatana wabuye watshona engxiweni yakhe. “Naku ukudla,” watsho uKatana.“Yhoo, undixolele. Ndenze kabi,” watsho uNonjana.“Masidle,” watsho uKatana.Bachopha phantsi aba bangani badla.
Besotshuba baaqhubeka nohambo baabuye badlala futhi ngathi aange baxabane.Baafika kwamngani wabo liselihle iwatshi.“Nihambe kanjani bangani bam?” watsho uNkukhu.“Sihambe kahle kakhulu,” baaphendula batsho ngankxetsha bencumelene.
Kwaaba ngumgubho omkhulu wokuzalwa.Baacula! Badantsa! Badla!
In a country called Gabon,  a little village stood at the very edge of a forest. In the heart of this forest,  in the highest branches of an enormous tree,  lived a very special bird − the bird that made rain.
For as far back as the villagers could remember,  they had taken the time to keep this bird happy. They saved scraps of bread,  pieces of fruit and fresh coconut milk,  and every week or two a group of villagers took these delicacies into the forest. When they had laid them at the base of the tree,  one of them played a simple tune on the thumb piano.
After a while,  the bird flew down to the ground to eat and drink. When she had finished,  she began to sing the most beautiful song.   At the same time,  she raised her dark,  shiny blue wings,  and within minutes,  the rain began to fall.
This went on for many years. Because the rain fell regularly,  the crops grew abundantly and there was plenty of food in the village.   But gradually things began to change. Somehow,  the villagers were always busy and they began to neglect the rain bird. "It will rain anyway," they said. "It's time to stop spoiling that silly old bird!"
But the people were wrong. When they stopped looking after the bird,  the rain stopped falling. The crops began to dry up and die,  and the animals grew thin and weak. Still,  nobody in the village went into the forest to feed the bird that brought the rain. Now they were all too busy trying to find money to buy food in the neighbouring town.
One scorching day,  a young girl called Ketti decided to go into the forest after school. "At least it will be cool in there," she thought. She walked and walked,  and after some time,  she came to the tall tree in which the rain bird lived. Ketti stared up at the tree. Suddenly,  she remembered how her granny had taken her into the forest to feed the bird when she was still a tiny child. Ketti opened her school bag and pulled out a piece of bread left over from her lunch. Carefully she laid the bread at the base of the tree. Then because she had no thumb piano, she sang an old song that she had known all her life.
With a loud whooshing sound,  a beautiful blue bird swooped out of the branches above Ketti's head and began to eat the bread. When the bird had finished,  she opened her mouth and sang a few pure,  high notes. Then she raised her shiny wings and all of a sudden Ketti heard the rumble of thunder. By the time she reached her home,  giant rain drops were pelting down,  cooling the baking red earth.
Ketti was very happy,  until she told her parents what had happened. "Don't be silly!" scolded her mother. "Nobody believes that bird has anything to do with the rain anymore!" "Your mother is right," said Ketti's father. "The drought has been broken now and we will be fine. Don't go wasting good bread feeding that greedy old bird again!"   Though Ketti didn't argue with her parents,  she felt sure they were wrong. "If only Granny were still alive," she said to herself,  "she would have believed me!" But Ketti's granny had died a few years earlier. The only thing Ketti had left,  was her granny's old thumb piano.
Two weeks passed and there was no more rain. The crops began to shrivel up again and the hungry animals' ribs began to stick out even more. The sun beat down mercilessly from a glaring blue sky.   "I don't care what they say!" thought Ketti. "We need rain. I'm going to feed the bird again tomorrow!"
So,  early the next morning,  after taking a slice of bread and a handful of red berries from the kitchen,  Ketti slipped out of the house. She began to make her way to the centre of the forest.   What she didn't realise,  was that her father was also awake. When he saw what his daughter was doing,  he realised that she was going to feed the rain bird again.
"I'll teach that  child a lesson!" he said to himself angrily. He snatched his bow and arrows and silently followed Ketti into the forest. Just as the bird flew down to eat the food that Ketti had set out for it,  her father raised his bow and released his deadly arrow. The arrow flew straight into the bird's heart. The bird let out a piercing shriek. Terrified,  Ketti spun around − just in time to see her father fall down,  stone dead. Ketti screamed and turned around − just in time to see the arrow fall harmlessly from the bird's glossy body. Then the bird,  unharmed, swooped up into the highest branch of the tree.
Ketti raced out of the forest to a scene of utter devastation. Every animal and every person she saw lay dead on the ground. With a pounding heart,  she ran all the way back to her home.  She quickly found her granny's old thumb piano. "This is my only hope!" she thought. "The rain bird is angry. I have to make her happy again! I HAVE to!"
Half an hour later,  Ketti was back at the base of the big tree. Her body was drenched with sweat and she was gasping for breath. A few paces away from her lay the lifeless body of her father. Ketti looked away quickly,  and with trembling hands,  began to play the thumb piano. She played and played,  until her fingers hurt.
Finally,  what she wanted most in the world happened. Down swooped the bird as if nothing had happened. The bird ate some of the berries still lying on the ground and sang a few notes. Then,  as Ketti played on,  the bird raised her wings. Ketti heard a rustle behind her.
It was her father who had woken up! "I'm sorry!" he said again and again to the big, blue bird. Then he held out his hand to his daughter and they walked slowly back to the village. In the village all the people and animals were alive again.
That night the villagers held a meeting.They all agreed that they had learned a valuable lesson. And from that day onwards,  not one week passed without a special trip to the forest to feed the bird that brought the rain.
Grandma's garden was wonderful. It was full of sorghum, millet, and cassava. But best of all were the bananas. Although Grandma had many grandchildren, I secretly knew that I was her favourite. She invited me often to her house. She also told me little secrets. But there was one secret she did not share with me. Where she ripened bananas.
One day I saw a big straw basket placed in the sun outside Grandma's house. When I asked what it was for, the only answer I got was, "It's my magic basket." Next to the basket, there were several banana leaves that Grandma turned from time to time. I was curious. "What are the leaves for, Grandma?" I asked. The only answer I got was, "They are my magic leaves."
It was so interesting watching Grandma, the bananas, the banana leaves and the big straw basket. But Grandma sent me off to my mother on an errand. "Grandma, please, let me watch as you prepare." "Don't be stubborn, child, do as you are told," she insisted. I took off running.
When I returned, Grandma was sitting outside but with neither the basket nor the bananas. "Grandma,  where is the basket, where are all the bananas, and where..." But the only answer I got was, "They are in my magic place." It was so disappointing!
Two days later, Grandma sent me to fetch her walking stick from her bedroom. As soon as I opened the door, I was welcomed by the strong smell of ripening bananas. In the inner room was grandma's big magic straw basket. It was well hidden by an old blanket. I lifted it and sniffed that glorious smell.
Grandma's voice startled me when she called, "What are you doing? Hurry up and bring me the stick." I hurried out with her walking stick. "What are you smiling about?" Grandma asked. Her question made me realise that I was still smiling at the discovery of her magic place.
The following day when Grandma came to visit my mother, I rushed to her house to check the bananas once more. There was a bunch of very ripe ones. I picked one and hid it in my dress. After covering the basket again, I went behind the house and quickly ate the banana. It was the sweetest banana I had ever tasted.
The following day, when Grandma was in the garden picking vegetables, I sneaked in and peered at the bananas. Nearly all were ripe. I couldn't help taking a bunch of four. As I tiptoed towards the door, I heard Grandma coughing outside. I just managed to hide the bananas under my dress and walked past her.
The following day was market day. Grandma woke up early. She always took ripe bananas and cassava to sell at the market. I did not hurry to visit her that day. But I could not avoid her for long.
Later that evening I was called by my mother and father, and Grandma. I knew why. That night as I lay down to sleep, I knew I could never steal again. Not from grandma, not from my parents, and certainly not from anyone else.
How many cats?0 Zero cats.No cats.
How many cats?1 One cat. One black cat. A black cat can eat red meat.
How many cats? 2 Two cats. White and grey cats.White and grey cats play in flowers.
How many cats? 3 Three cats. Grey, cream and spotted cats. They play up and down on walls.
How many cats? 4 Four cats. Four cats are good friends of Paul.
How many cats? 5 Five cats. Five cats play around the sitting room.
How many cats?6 Six cats. Six cats can sit together and watch the film.
How many cats? 7 Seven cats. Seven cats play around the compound.
How many cats? 8 Eight cats. Eight cats do not want the dog.
What's this we see?A kitten is stuck in atree! "I will rescue you!" Paul said.
"Mama, can we keep him? Just one more." How many cats? 9"Nine cats are toomuch." Mama said.
I peel the potatoes.
I chop a cabbage.
I grate the carrots.
I wash the beans.
I cut the butternut.
I chop the spinach.
My mom chops the onions.
Onions make me cry when they are chopped.
One day after a heavy rain, Iman looked across the sky and saw colours in it for the first time.
"How beautiful," she thought. Someone must have worked very hard, painting the sky with a brush like Daddy paints houses.
She ran to her sister and said, "Zarah look! Someone has painted the sky for us and made it beautiful."
But Zarah said, "No, silly. That is a rainbow. You are little and I am big. I know why it is in the sky. Let me show you."
Zarah took Iman to the zoo. She said, "Rainbows do not appear because lion cubs roar for the first time or because elephants are born."
She took Iman to a field of flowers and said, "They do not appear because butterflies lose their colours in the clouds."
She showed Iman a book. She said, "They do not even appear because rhinos run across the ground and scare colours up into the sky."
"I know why rainbows really appear. Mummy told me and now I'll tell you." Zarah took Iman's hand and led her to a playground.
"Rainbows appear in the sky because of children like you and me. One day, colours looked down from above and liked what they could see."
"They saw children with light skin, dark skin and everything in between. They thought, 'How wonderful it must be to be as beautiful as these.'"
"They came together in the sky and spoke about what they could do. They decided, 'If we are to be beautiful we must do it as a group.'"
"Now they join together and shine as brightly as they can. Hoping to be as beautiful as the children they see, just like you and me."
Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.
The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.
Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find theright man.
Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. This herb would healher father's wound. Butthe lake was filled with dangerous spirits.
Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. Some men did not return from the lake at all.
Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" But Nangila had made up her mind.
On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."
When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.
Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived intothe lake. She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.
When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She was afraid, but she sang the song the old woman taught her, "I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here, in the land where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers."
Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.
Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. The entire village danced and praised Nangila.
“Matshelo ndi holodei ya lushaka, a thi khou ya tshikoloni,” ndi Mulweli a tshi amba na khotsi awe.“Na nṋe a thi shumi matshelo,” ndi khotsi vhane vha khou ralo.“Baba, ndi mini zwine vha zwi ita nga Duvha ḽa Vhashumi?”
“Zwo luga ṅwananga, kha ri ndi mu vhudze nga ha Ḓuvha ḽa Vhashumi ḽa Mashangooṱhe,” ndi khotsi vha tshi fhindula.“Mafhungo o thoma musi vhashumi vha tshi lwela uri vha shume awara dza malo nga ḓuvha. Vho vha vha sa ṱoḓi u shuma awara dzi fhiraho malo nga ḓuvha.”
“Vho vha vha tshi shuma awara nngana?” hu vhudzisa Mulweli.“Vho vha vha tshi anzela u shuma awara dza fumi kana dza fuminthihi nga ḓuvha,” ndi khotsi vha tshi fhindula“Nga ḽa 1 May 1886, vhashumi vha ngei Amerika vho ṱereka uri awara dzi fhungudzwe dzi vhe malo.”
Muṅwe muthu o mbo ḓi posa bomo kha mapholisa musi hu tshi khou ṱerekiwa.“Nga murahu ha itea mini?” ndi Mulweli a tshi vhudzisa.“Vhashumi vhaṋa vho farwa nge vha posa yeneyo bomo. Vho mbo ḓi vhonwa mulandu nahone vha vhulawa,” ndi khotsi vha tshi fhindula nga u ongolowa.
“Vhashumi u mona na shango ḽoṱhe, vho ṱerekela u vhulawa ha vhenevho vhashumi vhaṋa. Vhashumi vho mbo ḓi tikedzana nga vhuthihi.U bva zwezwo, ḓuvha ḽa 1 May ḽo mbo ḓi vha ḽa u lwela ha vhashumi zwiimo zwa khwine zwa u shuma,” ndi khotsi vha tshi anetshela.
“Vhaṅwe vha vhidza ḽeneḽi ḓuvha uri ndi ‘May Day’. Ḓuvha ḽa u thoma ḽa May ḽo mbo ḓi dzhiiwa sa ḓuvha ḽa u lwela pfanelo dza vhashumi na ḽa uri hu vhe na vhuthihi kha vhashumi vhoṱhe. Ndi holodei ya lushaka mashangoni manzhi,” ndi khotsi vha tshi khou ṱalutshedza.
“Nga Ḓuvha ḽa Vhashumi ngeno Afrika Tshipembe, ri ṱanganela na vhashumi vha dzimilioni u mona na shango ḽoṱhe kha u pembelela ḽeneḽi ḓuvha. Hu a dzudzanywa dziraḽi na mimatsho.”“Naa yo ḓi dzula i holodei ngeno Afrika Tshipembe u bva nga 1886?” ndi Mulweli a tshi vhudzisa.
“Na luthihi!” ndi khotsi vha tshi khou sea. “Muvhuso wa tshiṱalula wo vha u sa ṱoḓi ri tshi pembelela ḓuvha ḽa u thoma ḽa May.Fhedzi madzangano a vhashumi o vhudza muvhuso a ri: ‘May Day ndi yashu. Ḓuvha ḽa 1 May ndi ḽashu!’”
“U ṱereka ha vhashumi zwo thusa kha u fhelisa tshiṱalula. Ri tshi shumisa madzangano ashu a vhashumi, ro tamba tshipiḓa tsha ndeme kha u lwela pfanelo dza demokirasi,” ndi khotsi vhane vha khou amba.Khotsi vha a vhudzisa, “Ni nga humbulela uri dzi 1 May dzo vha lini holodei fhano?”
“Eee, zwi nga vha zwo itea nga murahu ha tshiṱalula. Musi Afrika Tshipembe ḽo no wana demokirasi,” ndi Mulweli a tshi fhindula.Khotsi awe vha tenda nga ṱhoho, “Ndi ngoho. Naho ro i wana demokirasi, vhashumi vhanzhi vha kha ḓi lwela zwiimo zwa khwine zwa u shuma na muholo.”
“Zwa zwino mafhungo anga nga ha ḓivhazwakale a guma henefha. Ndi khou ṱoḓa u ḓilugisela ḽa matshelo. Dzangano ḽanga ḽa vhashumi ḽo lugisela raḽi khulu hune ha ḓo vha hu na zwiambi zwa poḽitiki,” ndi khotsi vhane vha khou amba.“Na ene u tea u fhedzisa tshuṅwahaya yawe ṋamusi.”
“Ho luga Baba. Zwino ndi a pfesesa uri ndi ngani ḓuvha ḽa u thoma ḽa May ḽi ḽa ndeme kha vhone na vhaṅwe vhashumi. Zwa zwino mushumo une nda vha nawo ndi wa tshikolo,” ndi Mulweli a tshi khou setshelela.
This is my teacher.Her name is Teacher Akinyi.She loves us a lot.
Teacher Akinyi teaches us the alphabet. She teaches us the vowels. I can say the letters a,  e,  i,  o,  u.
Teacher Akinyi teaches us colours. I know red,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and black.
During nap time,  Teacher Akinyi sings us to sleep. She sings a lullaby to us.
On Monday,  she tells us stories about great men.
On Tuesday,  she tells us stories about great women.
On Wednesday,  she tells us stories about means of transport.
On Thursday,  she tells us stories about farming.
And on Friday,  we tell our own stories to the class.
Our teacher is the best teacher in the world! When I grow up,  I want to be like Teacher Akinyi.
Cracked brown wood.
Painted brown lion.
Soft brown bread.
Yummy brown cakes.
Old brown boots.
Shiny brown buffalo.
Woolly brown hat.
Smooth brown dog.
Dirty brown mud.
Wet brown skin.
And what is this? A clean face in a dirty mirror.
When we go walking and the road is long, we’ll walk together singing a song.
I am with you and you are with me. A journey is fun with our family.
I’ll keep you cosy like a mother hen. She keeps her chicks warm under her wing.
If the rain starts to fall down from the sky, like that good hat I’ll keep your face dry.
If storm clouds get angry and grumble and moan, be brave, why cry? You’re not alone.
We’re walking together so we never get bored. Look up! Look around! See where we’ve explored!
If you see something that’s funny to see, I don’t want to miss it. Please share it with me!
If your feet start to hurt from the distance we’ve passed, don’t worry, we’ve made it! Here’s the clinic at last.
We all need to check our throat, lungs and ears. Get strong as you grow, it’s no reason for tears.
Do you think it’s scary? Here, hold my hand. She’ll check your blood pressure with this clever armband.
They give us our medicine, tell us what we should know, to keep us all healthy. Now back home we go.
It’s okay to be tired, there’s so much we’ve seen. Now it’s your bedtime. Sleep well and sweet dreams.
Goat was king of animals and birds. He called a meeting.
Goat told them that he had a dream. They all listened.
The dream was about hunger. "What shall we do?" asked Cat.
Hen and Duck said, "Let's keep food in the king's store."
King Goat said, "Tie up anyone who does not obey."
The time came to choose a new king. They chose Cat.
Goat did not want Cat as king. "I am the king," Goat said angrily.
Goat did not take food. Cow asked, "What shall we do?"
The animals and birds talked together. They were angry with Goat.
Dog said, "I was always with him when he was king."
Sheep said, "I gave his children my beautiful wool when he was king."
Pig cried, "When he was king, I looked after his garden."
"Did Goat think he will be king forever?" Sheep  asked.
The animals agreed that Goat must take food to king Cat.
The animals found Goat relaxing. Goat said, "I will always be king."
"We will tie you and take you to the new king."
Cow pulled Goat to the king's court. Others cheered.
That's why goats refuse to move when they are pulled.
Tamara was a five-year-old girl who lived with her family. Their village was near a forest that had wild animals.
Tamara was obedient to her parents. She looked after sheep and goats.
Tamara loved listening to birds singing as she took care of the animals. As the birds sang, she put her own words to the tune.
Tamara was too young for school. Her parents only allowed their older children, Nashipae and Tasieku, to go to school. It was 10 kilometres away.
Nashipae and Tasieku went with other children from the village in the morning and returned in the evening. They carried food in small containers.
Tamara asked her mother, "When will I go to school?" Her mother answered, "You will go soon, my dear child."
One day, a car arrived with the chief and two ladies. The chief made sure that children went to school at the right age.
People believed that if a child was able to stretch her hand over her head and touch the ear, she was ready to start school.
The chief asked, "How old are you?" Tamara replied, "I am five years old." "Let's see if you can go to school," the chief said.
One of the ladies took Tamara's right arm and gently placed it over her head. Tamara touched her left ear.
Tamara would go to a different school than Nashipae and Tasieku. It was new and closer to home.
Tamara was very happy. She thought, "I will read and write like Nashipae and Tasieku."
A long time ago,  in the vast city of Johannesburg,  a baby girl was born. That baby was me. My mom called me Miriam. Miriam Makeba.
Mom was a sangoma,  but she also worked to make other people's homes neat and clean. It was hard for my mom to earn enough for both of us. She started selling homemade beer to bring in more money.
The laws of the land said that selling homemade beer was wrong. The police sent my mom to jail for six long months. I was only 18 days old,  and needed my mom. So even though I was just a baby,  I went to jail too.
As a little girl I loved to sing. When I was older,  I helped my mom clean houses. Singing songs as I worked made the chores go faster and the days seem brighter. Singing made me happier than I can explain.
I sang in my church,  and this made others happy too. Music has the power to bring people together. When we were singing we felt brave and strong.
People said my voice was a gift and my songs were special. I sang with other musicians and our music was heard all over the world.
My home was Sophiatown,  a place of culture and music. Sophiatown,  a place where South Africans could make music in harmony and dance together. But the people who ruled the land at the time did not like this togetherness. Those rulers didn't want black and white people to be friends.
I knew it was wrong to treat people differently because of their skin colour. I did not hide my beliefs,  and so those people in charge wanted me out of the country. When I was singing in America,  I was told I could never return home.
People all over the world heard my story. My songs and my story helped many to see how there was no fairness in South Africa for those with black skin. I decided to go on singing and telling the truth about my country,  no matter what.
The world loved my music and I was welcomed in many countries. I won awards and sang for important people all over the globe. My life was good,  but something was missing. I could not sing in my home country,  and people there were not free.
Then a wonderful day dawned when Nelson Mandela became president of South Africa. New people were in charge and the unfair laws belonged to the past. I finally went home with new hope in my heart.
After that I could sing in a free,  fair country. People of different skin colours could enjoy music together. I helped make this happen because I was brave and strong. I sang the truth in all of my songs.
I can run with it.
I can jump with it.
I can dance with it.
I can swim with it.
I can skip with it.
I can kick with it.
I can escape with it.
But I can never fly with it.
A long time ago,  three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly,  they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home,  Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But,  she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise,  a dog opened the door and said,  "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said,  "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said,  "Make the bed for me!" Nozibele answered,  "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed,  or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said,  "Nozibele,  today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house,  cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone,  Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed,  one behind the door,  and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back,  he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele,  where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here,  under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here,  behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here,  in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
My mother planted. She planted a small garden. She planted a small garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a small garden. He planted a small garden of flowers.
My mother weeded in both gardens.
My father watered in both gardens.
My parents and I worked in the small gardens. My sister and I harvested the flowers and peas.
The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.
My mother planted. She planted a large garden. She planted a large garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a large garden. He planted a large garden of flowers.
UBongani wazalwa ngonyaka we 1967, eMthatha kwelase Mpuma Koloni, eMzantsi Afrika.Wafunda isikolo kwilali yase Ngqamakhwe.Umama ka Bongani wayengumongikazi, kwaye utata wakhe engugqirha.
Ekupheleni kwemini, yonke imihla, abazali baka Bongani babedla ngokuthetha ngomsebenzi wabo.Wabanomdla ngeengxaki zempilo, nokunceda abantu.Ngokuva ngomsebenzi wabazali bakhe, uBongani waba nomdla kwiNzululwazi yeze Mpilo.
Esikolweni, uBongani wayezithanda izifunda zakhe zeziBalo kwa nezobuNzululwazi yeZempilo.Wayesebenza nzima kwezo zifundo kuba wayefuna ukuba ngugqirha.Emva kokugqiba amabanga akhe aphezulu esikolweni, wayokufunda kwiDyunivesithi ya KwaZulu-Natal neyase Kapa. Waba ngumfundi ogqwesileyo.
Ngenxa yobukrelekrele bakhe, uBongani wachongwa. Wafumana inkxaso-mali wayokuqhubekeka ngemfundo kwiDyunivesithi yaseOxford, eNgilani.Wafunda nase Melika. Waze wabuyela eMzantsi Afrika ukusebenza njengo gqirha.Hayi madoda! UMayosi wayengugqirha onobubele nothobekileyo, futhi obathanda kakhulu abantu.
Kuthe kungekudala, uBongani watyelela phesheya kwakhona.Wayefuna ukufunda ngakumbi malunga nentliziyo.IKhadiyoloji zizifundo zentliziyo, kwakunye nezifo ezithi zihlasele intliziyo.UBongani wayeyi Khadiyolojist – ugqirha wentliziyo.
UGqr Mayosi wayesebenza nabanye abaphandi baphesheya, kwaye bafumanisa into eyayibaluleke kakhulu.Aba baphandi bafumanisa ukuba kutheni abanye abantu besiba nesifo sentliziyo.Oku kufumanisa kwakubalulekile koogqirha umhlaba wonke jikelele.
UBongani wabuyela eMzantsi Afrika nolwazi lweengcali kwezonyango.Wasebenza noMphathiswa wezempilo waze wanika neengcebiso ngeengxaki zempilo zelizwe.Iphupha likaBongani lalingelokuba izwekazi i-Afrika, likwazi ukusombulula iingxaki zempilo ngokusebenzisa iNzululwazi.
UBongani wayezithemba njenge Nzululwazi yase Afrika. Uphando akalufumanisayo lwalulolubalulekileyo kwihlabathi lonke.UMzantsi Afrika wabhiyozela umsebenzi kwanempumelelo yakhe.Yiva ke! Ngenxa yokusebenza kakhulu, ukuzinikela nokuphanda nzulu kwezeNzululwazi, wathiwa jize ngewonga eliphakamileyo lelizwe, elibizwa uMyalelo weMaphungubwe
UBongani wayenguNjingalwazi kwicandelo leNtliziyo kwiDyunivesithi yaseKapa (UCT).Kwimfundiso zakhe, wayesabelana ngolwazi lwakhe kubafundi bakhe.Wayeziqonda iingxaki zabafundi abaninzi. Wabakhuthaza oogqirha abaselula nabanye ababesafundela iNzululwazi Zempilo.
UNjingalwazi uMayosi waphinda wonyuselwa njengeNtloko yeNzululwazi Zempilo eUCT.Wayesoloko exakekile ngomsebenzi wakhe. Wayengu titshala, umphandi, kwane nkokheli.UBongani Mayosi ukhunjulwa njenge sibonelo ngabantu abaninzi.
Inkwenkwana esuka ezilalini nakumaxethuka aseNgqamakhwe, yaba yinkokeli kwiNzululwazi yeZempilo kwenye yeDyunivesithi eziphakamileyo eMzantsi Afrika.Waba yincutshe yezeNzululwazi kwezeMpilo kumhlaba wonke jikelele.UBongani uphumelele izinto ezininzi ebomini ingakumbi imfundo, kodwa wayesoloko ethobekile.
Xa sifunda ngezeNzululwazi, singacinga ngo Gqr Mayosi.Singayibhiyozela impumelelo yakhe kwanaleyo yeeNzululwazi ezininzi zase Afrika.Kwaye singabhiyozela nexabiso lolwazi lwase Afrika.
Once upon a time, there was a boy who was so ugly that nobody loved him. Not even his parents. At home,  he would sit alone while his family watched television.
At school, he would sit alone while other children were playing.
He would walk alone behind the other boys when they went to fetch the cattle. They didn't want to walk with him.
One day he decided to leave home. He walked until he got to an indigenous forest. He started to feel scared, but was comforted by the thought that nobody would speak to him. Because nobody loved him.
He was about to enter the forest when an old, dirty,  ugly woman came up to him. She greeted him and asked why he was going into the scary forest. The boy was shocked to hear someone speaking to him. He told the old woman that he wasn't going anywhere. Because no one loved him.
The old woman asked if he needed help. He quickly said, "Yes." The old woman said that before she helped him, she wanted him to lick her face until she was clean and beautiful.
The boy didn't have any other choice in order to get the help he needed. He licked the sleep from her eyes,  the snot from her nose, and the wax from her ears. He licked her face until she was clean and beautiful.
The old woman thanked him. She said, "You will find many wonderful things in the forest, but don't take any of these things. Only bring back the root that you find."
The boy ran, wanting to see all of the things in the forest. Before he could enter the forest, the old woman called him. She said, "Boy! Come back here!" He ran back to her. She repeated, "Don't take any of the wonderful things in the forest. Only bring back the root that you find." The boy nodded and ran off.
Before he could enter the forest, he heard a voice saying, "Boy! Come back here!" He started to feel confused about what the old woman wanted. He ran back to her again. She said, "You will find many wonderful things in the forest. But only bring back the root that you find." The boy nodded and ran off.
Just after he had entered the forest, he heard a voice saying, "Boy! Come back here!" He again went back to the old woman. She said, "Listen to me. Only bring back the root that you find. Don't take anything else from the forest." The boy was annoyed with the repetition. He ran into the forest.
Once he was in the forest, he saw a bowl filled with money. He took the money and put it in his pocket. All of a sudden, he thought about what the old woman said. He took the money out of his pocket and put it back in the bowl.
He continued walking. He saw some splendid new clothes. He took off his clothes and put on the new ones. Then he thought about what the old woman had said. He took off the new clothes and put his old ones back on.
Next he saw the root. It was withered from the sun. He asked himself what the old woman thought he would do with the root. Next to the root, there was a bowl of food. The food smelled delicious and the boy was hungry. He couldn't stop himself from eating.
When he had finished,  he remembered what the old woman had told him. The old woman had said he must only take the root. He looked around for the root, but he couldn't see it anymore.
The boy left the forest feeling disappointed. He went back to tell the old woman what had happened. But the old woman was gone.
What is heavier? The chicken or the feather?
What is lighter? The flower or the corn?
Which baby is heavier?
Who is heavier,  elephant or dad?
Which is heavier? A kilo of stones?
Or a gram of cement?
Which is heavier? A kilo of sugar?
Or a kilo of feathers?
Today is the big day! After 9 months of waiting, Thabi's mother is going to hospital to have her baby. She will be back in 3 days. Can you read the date and day of the week on the calendar? What will the date be when Thabi's mother comes home?
"Bye bye sweetheart!" Thabi's mother says. "Please help Dad. I'll be home very soon, with a big surprise for all of us!" The baby has grown so big inside her mother's tummy that Thabi can't get her arms around her like she could before.
The taxi is hooting. It is time for her mother to leave. Thabi starts to cry. Her father lifts her up on his shoulders. She loves being so high up off the ground like this. She is now at least a whole head taller than her father! If Thabi's father is 1,6 metres or 160 centimetres tall. About how far off the ground is Thabi now?
Soon Thabi is sad again and starts to cry. This is the first time in her life that she and her mother have spent a night apart. Thabi's father puts her down on a chair in front of him. He wipes her tears and speaks softly to comfort her.
Thabi feels brave again, standing tall on her chair. "I am 6! I am a big girl!" she tells him. When she stands  straight on the chair like this, Thabi is about the same height as her father. Do you remember how tall he is? How tall do you think Thabi is, when she stands on the floor not the chair?
Thabi only has to wait for three days from Wednesday to Saturday, but to her it feels like years. Thabi tries to work out how many hours she has to wait. She knows there are 24 hours in one day, so she says to herself, "24 + 24 + 24 is_____." Do you know what the answer is?
"Dad," Thabi says. "I thought I was your baby! That is what you always call me. What will happen now? Will I stop being your baby?""You will always be our special first born child, Thabi," her father tells her.
Dad answers many questions about the new baby. Then he has an idea. "Why don't you write Mom a letter? You can tell her how much you miss her and ask her more questions about the baby." "I would love to, Dad. Please will you help me?"
After lunch, Thabi's father helps her to write the letter to her mother.Read Thabi's letter:Dear Mom,I love and miss you!Daddy says you will be home on Saturday. I can't wait to see you and the new baby. I have so many questions. Is our baby a boy or a girl? Will it look like me? When will our baby start to walk or talk?Love fromThabi, your big baby.
When she has finished writing her letter, Thabi starts to daydream. "Maybe there are two babies." Thabi thinks to herself. "Twins like some of my friends." Thabi thinks of Zodwa and Brenda, twin sisters who look exactly alike."What kind of twins could ours be?" her mind wanders off.
The big day has come and Thabi is so excited. She has waited 3 days (or, 72 hours), but it feels like many months since her mother went to hospital. They have waited 9 months for the baby to grow inside her mother's tummy. Thabi counts back in months, "April to March is 1 month, to February is 2 months…"Count back to find what month the baby first started growing inside Mom's tummy.
Thabi hears her parents at the front door. Thabi keeps very quiet. She wants to surprise them. But Thabi is in for a much bigger surprise. Her mother has come home with twins! Thabi has a sister and a brother!
﻿I lost my bat.    I cant find it anywhere.
I searched behind the door.    It's not there.
I checked on the shelf.   couldn't find it there.
﻿Searched under the cot.    It's not there either.
﻿checked in the box.     There is no trace of it.
Searched the whole loft.     couldn't find it there too.
﻿I searched for it everywhere.     couldn't find it anywhere.      There, It's in my sister's hand.
“This year we are going to have a special family gathering,” announced Mom Polygon. “Who is coming? I hope all the Polygons will be there. I miss my cousins,” said Khosi. “I miss my side of the family the most, the Quadrilaterals,” smiled Mom. “Yes, it’s a long time since we saw Rectangle, Square, and Rhombus,” said Dad Polygon. “Don’t forget, they have three children now!” Mom reminded Dad.
“What about cousin Scalene and her children? Are they coming?” asked Vusi. Mom answered, “Yes, they are Polygons, although they are not Quadrilaterals. Their surname is Triangle. The kids are Isosceles and Equilateral.” “Oh yes, the Triangle family!” exclaimed Vusi. “But they look a lot like the Quadrilaterals.” “No, not exactly,” said Mom. “Triangles have three sides, while the Quadrilaterals have four sides, like me.”
Dad Polygon added, “I am excited because my three other cousins will be here, they are Pentagon, Hexagon and Octagon. They are also part of our Polygon family.” Vusi asked, “Dad, why we are called Polygons?” “We are called polygons because we are 2-dimensional shapes. We are made of straight lines, and our shape is closed, as you can see, all our lines join up. Our cousins the Triangles, the Quadrilaterals, the Hexagons and the Pentagons will all be visiting,” replied Dad.
“Did you say that is Octagon coming? Is she also our relative?” asked Khosi. “Of course my daughter, by just looking at her you can see she belongs to our family. You need to look carefully at the number of sides your cousins have, otherwise you might not be able to see the difference. Cousin Octagon has eight sides because her name starts with Octa,” said Dad.
“Okay, what about Pentagon and Hexagon?” asked Vusi. “Cousin Hexagon has six sides because his name starts with Hexa,” replied Dad. “Pentagons have five sides. Our teacher told us that Penta means ‘five’,” added Khosi. “And remember that Tri means three and Quad means four. That’s what makes your Triangle and Quadrilateral cousins look different,” said Mom.
“Dad, how many sides does Heptagon have?” asked Vusi. Dad laughed and said, “I am not going to tell you. Remember we took a photograph with them at your uncle's wedding. I want you to look at the photograph carefully and tell me what you observe.” Vusi looked at the photograph and quickly answered, “Heptagon has seven sides!” Khosi added, “Yes, remember our teacher told us that Hepta means ‘seven’.”
“Oh my wife, can you see how clever our children are? Okay, what about Deca, what does it mean?” questioned Dad. “Ten! Ten!” shouted Vusi and Khosi together. “Yes, that's why one of your cousins is called Decagon, but he is not coming because he has to represent the swimming team. There are so few Decagons at their school,” Mom told them.
Then the children asked, “Mom and Dad, can we invite our friend Circle from next door?” Their parents agreed that Circle was welcome to join the family gathering. Just then they heard a knock at the front door, and Dad got up to check. “The Quadrilaterals are here! Welcome! Welcome” called Dad.
The rest of the family jump up to greet Square, Rectangle and the three Rhombus children. The Quadrilaterals are happy to arrive first.
The Triangle family knock on the door soon after the Quadrilaterals. Scalene, Isosceles and Equilateral are tired after their long journey, but they are so pleased to be with the rest of the family.
Finally, Octagon and Heptagon arrive with their children, two Pentagons and Hexagon. They have also brought three Squares with them. Octagon explained, “I hope you don’t mind that three Quadrilateral children from the village have come with us. They have never visited the city before.” “Friends and family are always welcome here,” smiled Mom. Then she sent all the children outside to play.
“What game are we going to play?” Vusi asked the other children. Equilateral squealed, “Let's play the tessellation game!” All the Polygon children started to tessellate. “Can I play with you? I also want to tessellate,” said Circle. Vusi said, “Shame, I’m sorry you can't tessellate my friend.” One of the Squares added, “Can’t you see your shape, you are not a Polygon. Circles can't tessellate.”
Circle was sad and felt left out. It's not so much fun playing together when someone is left out. Vusi said, “Hey guys, let's rather play a game that Circle can also play.” So the Polygons and Circle played happily together until the delicious food was ready.
When Asiimwe was still young, her mother loved her very much. She used to make her sleep on a good mat.
This mat was special. It was made of palm leaves in different colours.
The land around Asiimwe's home was dry and hot.There were many snakes, spiders and scorpions, but they didn't harm her.
According to her mother, Asiimwe's mat protected her.
Asiimwe started going to the local well. She also knew her grandmother's home and loved visiting her.
By bad luck, one day Asiimwe got lost on her way to her grandmother's home.
She sat down under a musisa tree and waited for help. While waiting, she fell asleep.
She started dreaming of a woman who looked like her grandmother. She was very happy.
When she woke up, she saw a bird and heard it calling her, "Asiimwe, Asiimwe, wake up and go home."
The bird flew while dropping a piece of mat that looked like Asiimwe's mat. Asiimwe followed the bird.
The bird led Asiimwe safely back home. Her family celebrated her return.
One day, Anansi the spider picked up some yams in his garden. They were very beautiful and very good yams.He cooked them carefully on the fire. Then he sat down to eat them.
As Anansi was about to eat the first bite, he heard someone knock on the door. "Oh no !" Anansi thought. "Who could it be?" But he opened the door. It was Turtle who looked very tired. "Anansi, please let me in. I've walked so far today and I'm so tired and hungry," Turtle said. So what could Anansi do except let him in?
Anansi was too selfish to share his beautiful and good yams with anyone. So he came up with a nasty plan.As Turtle sat down at the table and started reaching out to grab some yams, Anansi shouted at him, "Turtle, your hands are all dirty! You can't eat with your hands all dirty! Go wash them."Turtle's hands were really dirty. So he crawled gently towards the river, washed his hands and then crawled back to the table.
But meanwhile, Anansi had started swallowing the yams. When Turtle returned, he saw that the yams were gone.Turtle looked at Anansi. "Thank you for inviting me to dinner. If you ever come near my house, come see me and let me make this dinner for you," he told him. And Turtle started crawling slowly towards his house.
After some time, Anansi began to think more and more about the free dinner promised by Turtle. So one day he went to visit.Anansi arrived at Turtle's house at dinner time as the sun was setting over the river. Turtle was lying on a rock in the sun, warming himself like turtles do.When Turtle saw Anansi, he said, "Hello, Anansi, did you come to eat with me?"And Anansi replied, "Yes, that would be very nice, thank you." He was getting hungrier and hungrier.
So Turtle dived to the bottom of the river to set the table for dinner and get everything ready. Anansi waited on the rocks on the bank.Soon Turtle came swimming back and said, "Oh Anansi, it's ready now, come have dinner with me."And Turtle dived again and started eating the green leaves prepared for dinner.
Anansi tried to dive to the bottom of the river, but it was a spider, not a turtle, and he couldn't dive that deep. He always came to the surface.He tried to jump into the river, he tried to dive, but nothing helped. He couldn't come down to eat that dinner.
Finally, Anansi had an idea. He put many stones in his coat pockets and was heavy enough to sink to the bottom of the river. How clever he was!He saw Turtle's table, full of juicy green leaves and lots of other delicious foods. Anansi's mouth was watering.
But just as Anansi grabbed some of that delicious food, Turtle stopped him. "Anansi, aren't you going to dinner with your coat on? We don't do that at home."Anansi, without thinking, replied, "Oh, of course you're right, Turtle, what was I thinking?" He took off his coat.
But without the stones in his pockets to hold him down, Anansi immediately rose to the surface of the river and found himself out of the water. Anansi sadly put her head in the water and watched Turtle eat all the delicious food!
Flies are insects.
Flies like living in dirty places.
In toilets, rubbish pits and on food.
Flies move from dirty places to our homes.
They fall on our food and make it dirty.
When one eats dirty food,  he gets stomach ache.
A flies are very dangerous.
Once upon a time, there was a girl named Kay. Kay's parents were brilliant scientists. They were working on a top secret project in their laboratory.
An evil scientist called Dr Devious wanted to know the secret of the secret project. One dark night, Dr Devious sent her accomplice Dan Diabolical to kidnap Kay's parents.
Dan got the parents. He almost got Kay, but she was small and fast. She managed to slip through his fingers. Kay ran like a lightening bolt.
When she stopped running, Kay found herself in a dark forest surrounded by trees.As she looked up to see the sky, Kay tripped and fell!
She fell down, down, down, and bumped her head.When Kay woke up, she was in a nice room with a big TV.
"Hello Kay," said the man on the TV. "I am a secret agent for World Good! You are our newest secret agent!" With those words, Kay grew as brave as a wolf.
After her parents returned home, Kay went to the tree to find the man on TV.She found the tree, but there was no door.Kay sat down and looked up into the trees.
Vhathu vhoṱhe vha ḽifhasi vha na vhubvo havho. Vhubvo hashu ndi vhufa hashu.Vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe vha pembela vhubvo havho nga u kuvhangana nga ḓuvha iḽi sa miṱa, mashaka, zwitshavha, kana sa lushaka.Afrika Tshipembe ḽi na sialala dzo fhambanaho.
Roṱhe Afrika Tshipembe ri na vhufa hune ra ḓikhoḓa ngaho!Afrika Tshipembe ḽi na vhufa ha manakanaka.Kha mvelele dzo fhambanaho hu na tshaka dzo fhambanaho dza zwiḽiwa, zwiambaro, zwinwiwa na nyimbo na mitshino.
Kha sialala dzo fhambanaho hu na vhurereli, vhuṱambo na mitupo.Vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe vha amba nyambo dzo fhambanaho. Shango ḽa Afrika Tshipembe ḽi na nyambo dza 11 dza tshiofisi.
Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa nga Nyambo dza Tshiofisi dza Afrika Tshipembe:Ilanga lamaGugu (isiNdebele)Usuku lwaMafa (isiXhosa)Usuku lwamagugu (isiZulu)Letšatši la Bohwa (Sepedi)Letsatsi la Botjhaba (Sesotho)Letsatsi la Ngwaoboswa (Setswana)Lilanga Lemagugu (Siswati)Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa (Tshivenḓa)Siku ra Ndzhaka (Xitsonga)Erfenisdag (Afrikaans)Heritage Day (English)
Nga tshifhinga tsha muvhuso wa tshiṱalula (apartheid), ḽa 24 Khubvumedziḽo vha ḽi tshi pfi Shaka Day.Musi muvhuso wa tshiṱalula wo no fa, phaḽamennde yo shandula Ḓuvha ḽa Shaka ḽa vha Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa. Vho ḽi ita ḓuvha ḽa u pembela ha vhathu vhoṱhe vha Afrika Tshipembe.Ri pembelela u sa fana hashu sa tshaka nnzhi na vhufa hashu hu no fana.
Ndayotewa ya Afrika Tshipembe i na milayo i no ri dededza. I na milayo i no ṱuṱuwedza na u tsireledza zwa vhufa hashu roṱhe.Ndayotewa i ri roṱhe ri a lingana.A hu na a no fhira muṅwe!
Vhathu vha songo itelana tshiṱalula.Ri tea u farana nga u lingana.Muthu muṅwe na muṅwe u na pfanelo dzi no lingana. Roṱhe ri na pfanelo dza nyambo, vhurereli, na sialala.
Nga Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa, vhunzhi ha vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe vha a imba nyimbo dzavho dza sialala na mitshino.Ri dovha hafhu ra ḓiphiṋa nga u bika zwiḽiwa zwa sialala.Vhaṅwe vha elelwa vhomakhulukuku vhavho nga zwirendo. Vhaṅwe vha tshi ya u phasa zwaloni zwavho.
Hu ambariwa zwiambaro zwa mivhala yo fhambanaho da miṅwenda, tshishwetshwe, zwibeḽana na zwiṅwe zwinzhi.Musi ri tshi pembelela Ḓuvha Ḽa Vhufa sa vhathu vha Afrika Tshipembe, ri pembelela na zwiga zwa lushaka.Zwiga zwa lushaka ndi zwipuka na zwimela zwine zwa vha tshipiḓa tsha vhufa hashu.
Zwiga izwi zwa Afrika Tshipembe ndi:Tsepe i re tshiga tsha tshipuka tsha lushaka.Musilisili ndi tshiṋoni tsha lushaka. Muhovhohovho ndi muri wa lushaka.Phurothia ndi dzuvha ḽa lushaka.Galjoen ndi khovhe ya lushaka.
Zwikolo zwi a fara vhuṱambo ha u pembelela Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa musi iḽi ḓuvha ḽi tshee kule.Vhana vha ambara zwiambaro zwa sialala vha vhudza vhaṅwe afha kiḽasini zwine vha ḓivha nga sialala ya havho.Vha thetshedzana zwiḽiwa zwa sialala dzo fhambanaho, na u tshina mitshino ya sialala dzo fhambanaho.
Zwa Ḓuvha ḽa Vhufa zwi tea u pembelelwa hoṱhe Afrika! Avha vhanaVhana vha Afrika vha no ḓihudza nga vhufa vha ri:Ndi pfi Namunya. Ndo ambara shuka.Ndi pfi Adilah. Ndo ambara kaftan.Ndi pfi Isoka. Ndo ambara gele.Ndi pfi Sipho. Ndo ambara bheshu.
One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi’s cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”Her stomach growled when the baby’s powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life.
One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter.What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.
Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong.Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed.She taught them to sing: “Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers.He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, “You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back.”Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi’s broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers.How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father’s face.
On her sixth birthday she went to school. “You must choose an English name,” said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. “Why do I need a new name?” she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: “Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna.” What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn’t mess with.When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, “You have a big job, my blessing.”At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.
Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride.Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, “You must apply, my clever friend.” “What is the prize?” asked Albertina, growing curious.“A scholarship to high school!” said Betty. “You must apply. You’ll win it, for sure.”
Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.The test began. Albertina’s fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. “Well done, Albertina!” said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. “Well done to Albertina for full marks,” he said, “but you are too old. The scholarship goes to…”Albertina tried not to cry. “That’s unfair,” shouted Betty, hopping with fury. “That wasn’t in the rules!” How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home.The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn’t like the story one bit either.
Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached.She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse’s silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground.
School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty’s back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons.In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? “But nuns earn no salary,” said Father Bernard. “Perhaps you should become a nurse? You’ll be paid while you study.”
Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse.Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.
Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina’s eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children.Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men’s Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina’s long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation.Max had his mother’s black button eyes and his father’s round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. “How rude you are!” she said, “trampling mud inside my home.”In the morning Albertina’s favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover.She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police.
She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, “Wathint’ abafazi; wathint’ imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!”Many hard years followed after Walter’s arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. "Ants don't read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need."
Little Ant would read all day, he'd read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down, the ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. "A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read."
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said, "Hey,  there's one!"
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger,  carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand, "Now I think I understand. The way you love to read a book makes me want to take a look."
Once upon a time, all the animals lived together in the bush. The rooster was their chief.
Rooster told the animals that the comb on his head was made of fire. For this reason all the animals feared Rooster.
In those days, fire was made using a bow drill. One rainy day, Leopard's bow drill got wet. She could not make a fire to warm her family.
So Leopard sent her cubs to ask Rooster for fire from his comb.
Rooster was in a bad mood. He sent the cubs away without any fire. Leopard was upset when the cubs came back with nothing.
Late that night when Rooster was asleep, Leopard and her cubs went to steal the fire from Rooster's comb. Leopard picked some dry grass outside Rooster's house.
She put the dry grass next to the comb on the sleeping Rooster's head. But the grass did not catch fire. She carefully touched the comb. It was cold!
The cubs also touched the comb. There was no fire! The leopard family all started laughing.
The leopards' laughter woke Rooster and the chickens. Rooster turned his comb towards them, shouting, "You should run away. Aren't you afraid?"
Leopard replied, "We touched your comb and we know about your trick! We'll go back and tell the other animals. They will be angry with you."
The chickens were afraid. They ran away and Rooster ran with them. The chickens left the bush and went to live with people.
Since that time, chickens have feared leopards and lived with people for protection.
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means “daughter of the people of Kanyada.” She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. “First open my gift,” said Odongo. “No, my gift first!” said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar­Kanyada.She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them, they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, “I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again.”
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village. Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
I can hop
I can skip.
I can dance.
I can build a car.
I can wink.
I can sing.
I can read.
When we go walking and the road is long, we'll walk together singing a song.
I am with you and you are with me. A journey is fun with our family.
I'll keep you cosy like a mother hen. She keeps her chicks warm under her wing.
If the rain starts to fall down from the sky, like that good hat I'll keep your face dry.
If storm clouds get angry and grumble and moan, be brave, why cry? You're not alone.
We're walking together so we never get bored. Look up! Look around! See where we've explored!
If you see something that's funny to see, I don't want to miss it. Please share it with me!
If your feet start to hurt from the distance we've passed, don't worry, we've made it! Here's the clinic at last.
We all need to check our throat, lungs and ears. Get strong as you grow, it's no reason for tears.
Do you think it's scary? Here, hold my hand. She'll check your blood pressure with this clever armband.
They give us our medicine, tell us what we should know, to keep us all healthy. Now back home we go.
It's okay to be tired, there's so much we've seen. Now it's your bedtime. Sleep well and sweet dreams.
The Winter cold had passed. Spring was coming to Nkanyezi's village. Soon the villagers would gather to celebrate the new season. Nkanyezi looked forward to the Spring festival more than any other day in the year.
One warm morning, Nkanyezi overheard two village elders talking about the festival. "The people of Ndlovu have lost their spirit of celebration," one sighed. "How can we have a Spring festival in a village that has forgotten how to celebrate?" asked another.
Nkanyezi was worried. "How will the sun shine again unless we sing to wake it from its winter slumber?" she asked herself. Nkanyezi thought for a long time. "I must find what we have lost," she decided. "I must go in search of things that will bring back the spirit of celebration to my village."
The elders gave Nkanyezi their blessing for the journey. They gave her a bag to carry the things she would find. Nkanyezi was afraid, but she believed she would succeed.
Nkanyezi walked all day. She hiked up a hill, and down into a valley. She sailed across the great river, and climbed between sharp rocks. She marched across the plains until she reached the shadow of the red mountains.
As night was closing in, Nkanyezi arrived at a village of patterns and colours as she had never seen before. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.The mother of this tribe gave Nkanyezi a gift. She told the girl, "With love we give to you this paint to restore colour to your village." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the paint in her bag. Early the next morning she went on her way.
Nkanyezi walked all day, through a vast forest of giant trees. As the sky became too dark for her to see, she heard the sound of beating drums. She hurried towards the drumming, feeling the spirit of dance coming to her tired feet.
Nkanyezi found herself in the village of the Bhubezi. People were sitting around a fire, drumming and singing. She had never before heard such wonderful music. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The Bhubezi invited her to rest and stay the night.
In the morning the chief called on Nkanyezi. "My child," he said, "here is a special drum. It plays a new song every time you beat it." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the drum in her bag. She went on her way again, delighted with this gift of music and dance.
On the third day of her journey, as she passed a field of fat cows, her nose started to tingle. An aroma tickled her taste buds and her mouth started to water. She followed the scent, and arrived in a village to find people standing over steaming pots of stew. This tribe was famous for its feasts and Nkanyezi had never before tasted such flavours. After she had eaten her fill, she told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.
The next day, the council of cooks gave her a secret spice blend. "Our daughter," they said, "with these spices, happy tummies are guaranteed! We give you the gift of good food." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the spices in her bag. She knew she had everything she needed. With new energy she started the long journey back to the village of Ndlovu.
When she arrived home the villagers gathered around her to hear of her adventures. She told them the tales of what she had seen, heard, and eaten. Then she opened her bag to share the gifts given. The villagers rejoiced to receive these treasures. The generosity of others and the courage of Nkanyezi brought back colour, song and dance to the people.  And so the spirit of celebration was restored to the village of Ndlovu.
All of us went to the fun fair.
Father bought brother fancy glasses. Mother bought me a bright blue cap. The baby got sugar candy.
On the way home,  a very strong wind came. It blew my cap away.
My cap got stuck on a branch of a big old tree.
I cried a lot. And I did not eat my dinner.
Later that night,  the moon came up. It looked at my cap in the big old tree.
The moon tried on my cap. It smiled happily. I had to smile too.
After school the next day,  my mother gave me a shiny new red cap. "The moon sent it," she said.
That night,  both the moon and I wore our caps and smiled. We were happy.
Do you think the sun needs a hat?
Guess which cap I am wearing today!
Once there was a young man called Kumbana.
When he was 25,  he fell in love with a girl called Zangane.
They were together for 3 years,  but he didn't have enough money to marry her.
Then one day she found she was pregnant,  because they didn't use protection.
A little girl was born,  and they called her Kheri.
But Kumbana was still studying,  and Zangane had a job in a town far away,  so they had to live apart.
After a while,  Zangane found a new boyfriend. He came to live with her and the little girl.
Kumbana was heart-broken. He cried and cried because he was separated from his daughter.
Time went on,  and Kumbana found a new girlfriend too. They lived together,  but they did not have any children.
Now Kheri did not like her new father at all. She was very unhappy,  and he used to beat her.
So when she was 12,  her mother decided to send her back to live with her real father.
Then Kumbana and Kheri were both happy again.
Nda ay niina.
Ay ga ma suseeti fumbey haw.
Ay ga ma toori boosi kaaney haw.
Nda ay moyey.
Ay ga di baalu kaŋ go ga deesi hala beena ra.
Ay ga di maaje.
Nda ay mayo.
Ay ga ma ciiro kaŋ go teeku haro ga.
Ay ga ma leemu kaaniyo.
Nda ay kamba.
Ay ga ni kamba di.
Once upon a time, there lived a man who had plenty of everything – a large fertile farm, with cattle, sheep, and goats. But, as he grew old, he grew sad, because one thing was missing. He did not have a wife.
Standing under a tree one day, he had a brilliant idea.If he couldn't find a wife, perhaps he could make one?
So he set to work to shape a beautiful woman from a strong branch of the tree. When he had finished making the statue, he touched her eyes, and they opened. He blew gently on her, and she came alive.
She was truly the most beautiful woman he had ever seen. He knelt before her, and asked her to be his wife.
He gave her a colourful apron, beads, and a head ring, the sign of a married woman. And he built her a house with the mud and grass that used to lie at the foot of her trunk. "Only one thing I beg of you," he said to his wife. "Never tell anyone where you come from."
But before long, the young men from a neighbouring village began talking among themselves. "How can such an old man have such a beautiful young wife?" So they decided to steal her and take her to their own kraal.
The old man was heartbroken. He felt he could not live without her. But then he thought, "Perhaps if I have something of hers, I would not feel so sad?" So he sent his doves to find her, to sing to her, and to bring back something of hers to him.
When they found her, they sang to her in the language of birds. "Tree woman, tree woman. More beautiful than any other. Your husband has sent us. To bring back your apron!"
She gave them her apron, and they flew over the hill, over the river, back to her husband. He held the apron to his face, and was comforted for a little while.
But his longing did not go away. So again he sent his doves to sing to her:Tree woman, tree woman! More beautiful than any otherYour husband has sent us To bring back your head ring! And back they flew with the head ring, the sign of a married woman.
He held the head ring and sighed for his wife, far away in the kraal of other people. He called his doves again. He told them to go to her and sing: Tree woman, tree woman More beautiful than any other Your husband has sent us To bring back your life!
So away they went the third time. They perched on her shoulders. As they sang, each bird pecked out an eye. Immediately she turned again into a statue. Her feet and arms fell away. Then her head. And she fell to the ground.
Her husband slowly rolled her wooden trunk to the river. He stood her up with her roots in the water. Nourished by sun and soil, she grew leaves again.
And when the wind blows, the leaves sigh. Just as a woman does when she longs for her husband.
Njalo Ngwenya abedla tinhlanti phansi emfuleni.Mfene adla titselo etulu esihlanhleni.
Wagula kakhulu umntfwana Ngwenya.Gogo Ngwenya watsi abatfole sibindzi lesincane semfene kutomelapha.
Ngwenya wamema Mfene ekhaya lakhe lelihle, ngobe angakwati kubhukusha wamema emhlane wakhe lomubi.
Ekhatsi nemfula Ngwenya wacocela Mfene kutsi ugulelwa ngumntfwana, kute aphile udzinga sibindzi lesincane semfene.
“Hhawu, mnganami, ngabe usho singakesuki, phela sibindzi sami sihlala esihlaleni,” kusho Mfene.“Asijike sisilandze.”
Nembala bajike.Mfene azubele esihlahleni atsi nya.Ngwenya walindza.
Ngwenya walindza sikhatsi lesidze, kepha do! Mfene kubuya.
Many years ago,  the Lizard and the Frog were friends. One day  they decided to look for girlfriends in the city.
The Frog was jealous of  the Lizard's shining and brilliant skin.
He said,  "What did you do to look so beautiful? Look at me,  I am so ugly. What can I do about my skin?"
The Lizard said,  "Listen! Put some water in a pot and put it on the fire. Next you....."
But the Frog said,  "I know already,  I know! Keep quiet,  my friend!" And he left.
Frog arrived home and put some water in a pot.
When the water began to boil,  he threw himself into it.
His skin was burnt and his tail came off!
Instead of being brilliant and beautiful like the Lizard,  he was even more ugly!
Un arc-en-ciel has seven colours.
The first colour is rouge.
Kewyu is wearing une chemise rouge.
The second couleur is orange.
This is une orange. What else can you see that is le couleur orange?
The third colour is jaune.
Le jaune of an egg is jaune. What else can you see that is jaune?
The fourth colour is vert.
Our jardin de bananes is vert.
The fifth colour is bleu.
The ciel is bleu.
The sixième couleur is indigo.
These berries are le couleur indigo.
The seventh couleur est violet.
Violet is my couleur préférée! What is your couleur préférée?
Do you know the seven colours of the rainbow in French?
One day, mama bought different fruits.
"When can we have some fruit?" we asked. "We will eat the fruit tonight," said mama.
My brother Rahim is greedy. He tasted all the fruit. He ate a lot of it.
"Look at what Rahim did!" shouted my little brother. "Rahim is naughty and selfish," I said.
Mama was angry with Rahim.
We were also angry with Rahim. But Rahim was not sorry.
"Are you going to punish Rahim?" asked little brother.
"Rahim, you will be sorry soon," warned mama.
Rahim started feeling unwell.
"My stomach is painful," whispered Rahim.
Mama knew why Rahim was sick. "The fruit is punishing Rahim," she thought.
Later, Rahim said sorry to us. "I will never be so greedy again," he promised. We believed him.
Baboon and Crocodile were the best of friends. They played together. They ate together. They did everything together.
But one day,  Crocodile got very sick. He was close to dying. Crocodile went to the nyabezi. "If you want to get better,  you have to eat baboon meat," said the nyabenzi.
When he heard this, Crocodile cried. If he wanted to get better, he had no choice than to eat his friend the baboon.
When Baboon went to see his friend, he got on Crocodile's back. Crocodile took Baboon out to the deepest part of the river.
"What is troubling you, my friend?" asked Baboon.Crocodile said, "The nyabezi told me that if I want to get better I must eat you, my friend."
Baboon replied,  "No, don't eat me. I'm too small!Wait a minute and I'll call my grandfather. He's bigger than me. Eat him and you'll be full."
Crocodile said,  "Where is this grandfather of yours?"Baboon replied,  "He's in the tree on that island." Crocodile said,  "Go and get him so that I may eat him."
Baboon jumped off Crocodile's back and ran straight up the tree. Crocodile waited and waited. But Baboon did not return. And that was the end of their friendship.
"This year we are going to have a special family gathering," announced Mom Polygon. "Who is coming? I hope all the Polygons will be there. I miss my cousins," said Khosi. "I miss my side of the family the most,  the Quadrilaterals," smiled Mom. "Yes,  it's a long time since we saw Rectangle,  Square,  and Rhombus," said Dad Polygon. "Don't forget,  they have three children now!" Mom reminded Dad.
"What about cousin Scalene and her children? Are they coming?" asked Vusi. Mom answered,  "Yes,  they are Polygons,  although they are not Quadrilaterals. Their surname is Triangle. The kids are Isosceles and Equilateral." "Oh yes,  the Triangle family!" exclaimed Vusi. "But they look a lot like the Quadrilaterals." "No,  not exactly," said Mom. "Triangles have three sides,  while the Quadrilaterals have four sides,  like me."
Dad Polygon added,  "I am excited because my three other cousins will be here,  they are Pentagon,  Hexagon and Octagon. They are also part of our Polygon family." Vusi asked,  "Dad,  why we are called Polygons?"  "We are called polygons because we are 2-dimensional shapes. We are made of straight lines,  and our shape is closed,  as you can see,  all our lines join up. Our cousins the Triangles,  the Quadrilaterals,  the Hexagons and the Pentagons will all be visiting," replied Dad.
"Did you say that is Octagon coming? Is she also our relative?" asked Khosi. "Of course my daughter,  by just looking at her you can see she belongs to our family. You need to look carefully at the number of sides your cousins have,  otherwise you might not be able to see the difference. Cousin Octagon has eight sides because her name starts with Octa," said Dad.
"Okay,  what about Pentagon and Hexagon?" asked Vusi. "Cousin Hexagon has six sides because his name starts with Hexa," replied Dad. "Pentagons have five sides. Our teacher told us that Penta means 'five'," added Khosi. "And remember that Tri means three and Quad means four. That's what makes your Triangle and Quadrilateral cousins look different," said Mom.
"Dad,  how many sides does Heptagon have?" asked Vusi. Dad laughed and said,  "I am not going to tell you. Remember we took a photograph with them at your uncle's wedding. I want you to look at the photograph carefully and tell me what you observe." Vusi looked at the photograph and quickly answered,  "Heptagon has seven sides!" Khosi added,  "Yes,  remember our teacher told us that Hepta means 'seven'."
"Oh my wife,  can you see how clever our children are? Okay,  what about Deca,  what does it mean?" questioned Dad. "Ten! Ten!" shouted Vusi and Khosi together. "Yes,  that's why one of your cousins is called Decagon,  but he is not coming because he has to represent the swimming team. There are so few Decagons at their school," Mom told them.
Then the children asked,  "Mom and Dad,  can we invite our friend Circle from next door?" Their parents agreed that Circle was welcome to join the family gathering. Just then they heard a knock at the front door,  and Dad got up to check. "The Quadrilaterals are here! Welcome! Welcome" called Dad.
The rest of the family jump up to greet Square,  Rectangle and the three Rhombus children. The Quadrilaterals are happy to arrive first.
The Triangle family knock on the door soon after the Quadrilaterals. Scalene,  Isosceles and Equilateral are tired after their long journey,  but they are so pleased to be with the rest of the family.
Finally,  Octagon and Heptagon arrive with their children,  two Pentagons and Hexagon. They have also brought three Squares with them. Octagon explained,  "I hope you don't mind that three Quadrilateral children from the village have come with us. They have never visited the city before." "Friends and family are always welcome here," smiled Mom. Then she sent all the children outside to play.
"What game are we going to play?" Vusi asked the other children. Equilateral squealed,  "Let's play the tessellation game!" All the Polygon children started to tessellate. "Can I play with you? I also want to tessellate," said Circle. Vusi said,  "Shame,  I'm sorry you can't tessellate my friend." One of the Squares added,  "Can't you see your shape,  you are not a Polygon. Circles can't tessellate."
Circle was sad and felt left out. It's not so much fun playing together when someone is left out. Vusi said,  "Hey guys,  let's rather play a game that Circle can also play." So the Polygons and Circle played happily together until the delicious food was ready.
This is cow. Cow is cool!
By day,  it is an ordinary cow.
Flying a kite.
Kicking a ball.
By night,  a supercow!
Saving lives.
And fighting crime.
But if you close your eyes really tight,  and make a wish.
Cow might come to visit you too!
The end.
There once lived a chicken, called Cikizwa, who was an orphan.One day Cikizwa was out looking for food when she saw a mole coming out of his hole. She started speaking to the mole, but he ignored her.
From that day on, the mole and Cikizwa became great friends. The friends often hugged each other tightly. They loved and looked after each other.
Elephant often said really unkind things to Cikizwa to try and make her unhappy. One morning, when Cikizwa greeted Elephant, he snubbed her and said, “Ha, ha, ha! Go away, you orphan! What do you want from me? You’re so skinny. It’s as if you haven’t had enough mealies to eat!” Cikizwa was heartbroken.
The next day it rained and rained. It rained so heavily that many animals were swept away by the nearby river. Cikizwa was safe in her little coop because her father had been clever enough to build a drain nearby so that it didn’t get flooded.
But Cikizwa still felt sad about what had happened to some of her friends.Once the rain stopped, beautiful, colourful flowers appeared and there was a cool breeze. Cikizwa was out enjoying the sunshine when she saw Elephant limping along and crying loudly. Kind Cikizwa quickly called an ambulance.
When the ambulance arrived, Elephant got the help he needed. His leg was bandaged and he was given an injection to help with the pain. As soon as Elephant started to feel better, he thanked Cikizwa for her kindness.Then he said, “Cikizwa, my child, never change who you are. Keep on respecting and loving everyone.”
But Gumbi and Cikizwa didn’t care. They became even closer. Gumbi taught Cikizwa how to swim and dive, and Cikizwa taught Gumbi how to scratch in the sand for food.Eventually Gumbi asked Cikizwa to marry him. Cikizwa agreed immediately. Together they decided to have their wedding the following Saturday at a place that they both loved near the river.
Their wedding day arrived. The sun was blazing hot. What a wonderful wedding it was!The animal choir sang beautifully. Iguanas, whales, crocodiles, seals, sharks, dolphins, sheep, cattle, dogs, antelopes, hares, porcupines, water snakes and other animals all sang together:“It is enjoyable here at the wedding of the fish. It is enjoyable here at the wedding of the chicken!”
Once upon a time, there was a goat called Igodhoobe*. Igodhoobe the goat was the king of farm animals and birds. He lived a good life. One day, Igodhoobe the goat called all the animals and birds to a meeting.*pronounced ee-god-who-buhe
"My friends, I have called you because I had a dream," said the goat. All the animals and birds kept quiet. They listened to their king carefully.
"I dreamed that there was no food or water left in the land. Many of our relatives died!" said the king. When the animals and the birds heard the dream, they were worried. "What shall we do?" asked the cat.
The hen and the duck had an idea. They said, "Let each one of us bring food and put it in the king's store." All the animals agreed with this idea.
The king made a rule. He said, "Get ropes. Tie up anyone who does not bring food to my store. Then carry him to me."
But, soon after this, it was time for a new king to rule over the farm. All the animals and birds met and elected the cat as their new king.
But the goat refused to agree that the cat was king. "I'm the king. There is no other king. I can't obey any other animal," said the goat.
The animals took food to the new king's store. But the goat did not take anything. "When the goat was king, we all obeyed him. Now he does not want to obey our new king. What shall we do?" asked the cow.
All the domestic animals and birds were angry. "He thinks he is different to us," they all muttered.
The dog said, "I helped him when he was king. I did not sleep at night. I was always with him, ready to help."
The sheep said, "I gave him my wool to cover his children."
The pig said, "When he was king, he told his friends that I eat a lot. But I was often in his garden digging and weeding his maize and millet."
The sheep asked, "What did he say? That you eat a lot? Did he think that he will be king forever?" Then the sheep added, "Let him understand that he is not king any more. I don't know why he thinks he is so important."
All the animals laughed and agreed that the goat must take food to the new king. King Cat ordered the goat to come to him.
When the animals went to fetch the goat, he was sitting on a chair with his legs crossed. "I shall not go to the cat. There is no other king except me. When you become a king, you are always a king," said the goat.
"We will tie you with ropes and take you to the new king," said the sheep.
So the cow tied the goat to her tail. She then pulled him to the king. The sheep, the duck, the dog, the pig, and the cock cheered as the cow pulled the goat. They all shouted, "Take this stubborn goat to our new king!"
From that time, every goat refuses to move when it is pulled. It thinks that you are taking it to the king's court.
Once upon a time,  there was a young man called Pontshibobo. When he was little he was a very good boy. He had grown into a very good man. He respected everybody he met.
Pontsihibobo had a friend called Hippo. He was not respectful like Pontshibobo. One day Pontshibobo and Hippo were walking down the street together. Hippo had an idea,  "Let's go and smoke a zol," he said.
Pontshibobo was surprised. "Why do you ask me to smoke with you?You know that I don't smoke."
Hippo got cross. "If you don't want to smoke with me you can't be my friend," he said and walked off.
Pontshibobo went home and sat under the tree in his yard and cried.
"Why are you crying?" asked the tree. Pontshibobo got a huge fright. He had never heard a tree talking before. He told the tree about Hippo. "I have lost a friend," he said.
The tree asked Pontshibobo,  "What do you really wish for?" Pontshibobo thought for a while. Then he replied,  "I want a house. I am grown up now and I want a home. I want to marry and have children."
The tree also thought for a while. "Take my leaves and my branches and build yourself a house with them," he said. Pontshibobo did as the tree told him and he built a small,  beautiful house. He married and had children. He was happy.
But the tree was not happy. Pontshibobo had forgotten all about him and he felt sad. "I need a friend," the tree said to himself,  "or else I will die." Just at that moment Pontshibobo came into the yard. He heard what the tree said,  and he saw that the tree was very sick.
Pontshibobo was also sad. He had forgotten all about the tree that had helped him build a house for his wife and children. "I am so sorry," he cried and gave the tree a big hug.
When the tree saw that his friend was back he smiled. He grew new branches and fresh leaves.
Pontshibobo's children climbed up the branches of the tree. Pontshibobo and his wife sat in the shade after a long day at work. They told stories and laughed and were happy. Pontshibobo and the tree were friends forever.
Va ku, “Kasi Masingitana i nkata mani? I nkata mfanakuloni.”
Vavasati va chanchula loko va twa xigubu xa Magezi.
Vavanuna va wa mukapa va languta ahenhla na le hansi.
Mudungwazi u ndzuluta mahlo a chongorisa swa mafenya ya yena.
Vakhalabye va ba makhwela va hlakahla tinhloko va twa xigubu.
Vakhegulu va khinyakhinya swisuti va ba nkulungwani wa dzonga.
In a village on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa,  a little girl worked in the fields with her mother. Her name was Wangari.
Wangari loved being outside. In her family's food garden she broke up the soil with her machete. She pressed tiny seeds into the warm earth.
Her favourite time of day was just after sunset. When it got too dark to see the plants,  Wangari knew it was time to go home. She would follow the narrow paths through the fields,  crossing rivers as she went.
Wangari was a clever child and couldn't wait to go to school. But her mother and father wanted her to stay and help them at home. When she was seven years old,  her big brother persuaded her parents to let her go to school.
She liked to learn! Wangari learnt more and more with every book she read. She did so well at school that she was invited to study in the United States of America. Wangari was excited! She wanted to know more about the world.
At the American university Wangari learnt many new things. She studied plants and how they grow. And she remembered how she grew: playing games with her brothers in the shade of the trees in the beautiful Kenyan forests.
The more she learnt,  the more she realised that she loved the people of Kenya. She wanted them to be happy and free. The more she learnt,  the more she remembered her African home.
When she had finished her studies,  she returned to Kenya. But her country had changed. Huge farms stretched across the land. Women had no wood to make cooking fires. The people were poor and the children were hungry.
Wangari knew what to do. She taught the women how to plant trees from seeds. The women sold the trees and used the money to look after their families. The women were very happy. Wangari had helped them to feel powerful and strong.
As time passed,  the new trees grew into forests,  and the rivers started flowing again. Wangari's message spread across Africa. Today,  millions of trees have grown from Wangari's seeds.
Wangari had worked hard. People all over the world took notice,  and gave her a famous prize. It is called the Nobel Peace Prize,  and she was the first African woman ever to receive it.
Wangari died in 2011,  but we can think of her every time we see a beautiful tree.
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung’s shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife’s homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize’s shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. “It started well,” thinks Mkhize. “But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I’m reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf.”
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung’s kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize’s kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung’s shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. “What are you staring at?” asks Jabu. “Your kota! It looks bigger than mine,” says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu’s is bigger. “Something is not right here,” says Zodwa. “I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize’s shop is not busy anymore.” Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies, “Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!”
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she’s curious. She asks them what’s wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, “A kota is a quarter of a loaf!” Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, “The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters.”
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. “So, he is stealing bread from us!” she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize’s shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren’t new customers. “Oh, hello again kids,” he mutters, “how can I help you?” “Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter,” says Zodwa, pointing at her kota. “I want a quarter kota or my money back,” she adds firmly.
“Is it true Mr Mkhize? You’ve been cheating us!” cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. “What are you saying about me?” he protests. “I’m not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!”
Then Zodwa says quietly, “We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!” Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
“OK,” he says eventually, “I will give you your money back. “And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas,” speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, “I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas.”
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.
This story is about me, and an Old Age Home.
It is a big building in Bertrams, Johannesburg.The walls are colourful, and it is clean and quiet inside. The people that live there are very old. My mother took us there one day.
This Old Age Home is my happy place! I become happy whenever I see old people and can help them.
One day I went there and I washed some of the old people's hair.
I also served them food.Some of the old people were scary, but it still made me happy to be there.
There was this old angry lady who didn't want anybody to help her. She would start shouting.
There was another old lady, I held her hands and she didn't want to let go. Her hands were soft and warm. She had the same name as my sister, Aisha.
Old people make me happy. They have stories of past times which I will never know.
Once long ago,  the birds had a meeting. They wanted a king.
The Eagle wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "Your call is too sad to be king." The Ostrich wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You can't fly."
Peacock wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You are too proud. You cannot be king." Owl wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You sleep during the day. You cannot be king."
And so they did not get too far. Then one bird said,  "Who can fly the highest? That bird should be king." All the birds flew up up up into the sky.
Goose flew over the highest mountains in the world. Eagle flew into the blue above the mountains. But Vulture flew without stopping,  up towards the sun.
High above them,  the birds heard Vulture cry,  "I am the highest,  I am king!"
Vulture heard a tiny voice,  "Tink,  tink,  tink! I am the highest,  I am king." It was Ncede,  the Neddicky,  the smallest bird of all! He had held onto the feathers of Vulture as he flew up into the sky!
So Vulture flew down with the little bird still under his wing. The other birds were cross with Ncede. They waited for him,  ready to pluck out all his feathers.
But the quick little bird saw how angry they were,  and flew into an empty snake hole.
The birds told Owl to wait near the hole and catch him when he comes out. So Owl sat in front of the hole.
But the sun was warm and soon Owl was fast asleep. The little bird peeped out,  saw that Owl was asleep,  and z-zip,  away he went.
Owl was very ashamed that he had let the little bird escape. Now he only hunts at night. In the day,  he sleeps,  away from the sight of the other birds.
The Winter cold had passed. Spring was coming to Nkanyezi’s village. Soon the villagers would gather to celebrate the new season. Nkanyezi looked forward to the Spring festival more than any other day in the year.
One warm morning, Nkanyezi overheard two village elders talking about the festival.“The people of Ndlovu have lost their spirit of celebration,” one sighed.“How can we have a Spring festival in a village that has forgotten how to celebrate?” asked another.
Nkanyezi was worried. “How will the sun shine again unless we sing to wake it from its winter slumber?” she asked herself.Nkanyezi thought for a long time.“I must find what we have lost,” she decided.“I must go in search of things that will bring back the spirit of celebration to my village.”
The elders gave Nkanyezi their blessing for the journey. They gave her a bag to carry the things she would find.Nkanyezi was afraid, but she believed she would succeed.
Nkanyezi walked all day. She hiked up a hill, and down into a valley. She sailed across the great river, and climbed between sharp rocks. She marched across the plains until she reached the shadow of the red mountains.
As night was closing in, Nkanyezi arrived at a village of patterns and colours as she had never seen before. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The mother of this tribe gave Nkanyezi a gift.She told the girl, “With love we give to you this paint to restore colour to a village that has gone dull.”Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the paint in her bag. Early the next morning she went on her way again, excited with this gift of colour.
Nkanyezi walked all day, through a vast forest of giant trees. As the sky became too dark for her to see, she heard the sound of beating drums. She hurried towards the drumming, feeling the spirit of dance coming to her tired feet
Nkanyezi found herself in the village of the Bhubezi. People were sitting around a fire, drumming and singing. She had never before heard such wonderful music.She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The Bhubezi invited her to rest and stay the night.
In the morning the chief called on Nkanyezi.“My child,” he said, “here is a special drum. It plays a new song every time you beat it.” Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the drum in her bag. She went on her way again, delighted with this gift of music and dance.
On the third day of her journey, as she passed a field of fat cows, her nose started to tingle. An aroma tickled her taste buds and her mouth started to water. She followed the scent, and arrived in a village to find people standing over steaming pots of stew.This tribe was famous for its feasts and Nkanyezi had never before tasted such flavours. After she had eaten her fill, she told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.
The next day, the council of cooks gave her a secret spice blend.“Our daughter,” they said, “with these spices, happy tummies are guaranteed! We give you the gift of good food.”Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the spices in her bag. She knew she had everything she needed.With new energy she started the long journey back to the village of Ndlovu.
When she arrived home the villagers gathered around her to hear of her adventures. She told them the tales of what she had seen, heard, and eaten. Then she opened her bag to share the gifts given. The people rejoiced to receive these treasures.Through the generosity of others and the courage of Nkanyezi, the villagers again found the colour, song and dance in their lives. And so the spirit of celebration was restored to the village of Ndlovu.
My heart feels a lot of things.
I feel happy when my granny tells us stories in the evening.
I feel silly when I play with my friend.
I feel bad when my dad says he does not have money.
I feel loved when my mom gives me a hug.
Ayanda decided to run away from home.She went to the forest because she did not know where else to go.
A wolf in the forest chased Ayanda, so she climbed a tree.The wolf tried to bite her, so she climbed higher.
At the top of the tree, Ayanda saw the beautiful sun.She fell in love with the sun, and decided to stay in the forest.
Ayanda climbed the tree every day to talk to the sun.The sun became her family.
One day, Ayanda saw a man under the tree.The man was her father. Ayanda came down from the tree and her father explained why he was there.
He said, "Long before you were born, your mother and I would meet here. It is a special place.""Now I climb this tree to get peace when your mother and I fight," said Ayanda's father.
After a while, Ayanda's mother also came to the forest.She came to make peace with Ayanda's father. This was their peace tree.
Thabani was a slow-growing boy. He had a brother Heroine who was a handsome young man and a respected hero.  Thabani wanted to be like his brother.
One day, the Heroine  gave her little brother a spear. Excited, Thabani jumped up and down! The heroine hoped that Thabani would grow strong and be able to fight the battles and win.
The Heroine went out with the other young men to fight. He would return with crowns, but some days he would return with bruises and wounds.
When his brother won, Thabani would come singing victory songs or recite his own surnames.
And if the Heroine was injured, Thabani helped her to heal her wounds.
Thabani would get up in the morning and take his spear and sharpen itThabani would get up in the morning and take his spear and sharpen it
He was a good spear, ready to work. When the Heroine went to war, Thabani wanted to go with her, but he apologized and said he was still sharpening his coat.
Thabani sharpened his spear until it was thinner and thinner, until it was as small as a knife.The day came when the Heroine pressured her to leave. "Thabani, you're old now, and your spear is ready to work."
"Take the spear, let's go!" said the Heroine. He didn't give her time to think.Thabani came after the terrified Heroine! It was too late for the Heroine to see that the spear was gone!
They came to the battle. Thabani came with a full spear in the rock frightened and his weapon could not help him.The Heroine put him behind her to protect her brother. Thabani's spear was never ready for battle!
The heroine was wounded in battle. He helped Thabani take care of him so that he could win.A small spear, about the size of a knife, cut off the leaves that covered the wounds of the Heroine and her fellow soldiers
They returned to the battle with joy. Heroine was helped by Thabani, and Thabani was helped by Heroine to defeat the enemies!
Once upon a time there was a husband and wife with children. The mother prepared food for the family each day. She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.
The father would divide the meat. He would say to the eldest child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."
Then he would say to the next child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older." Each small portion became even smaller.  It went like this for all the children. The youngest child got a tiny piece of meat.
The father kept the big pieces of meat for himself and his wife. The children were quiet and ate their food.
Years passed and the children grew up. The parents grew old. They became weak. The children looked after their old mother and father.
One day at meal time, the eldest child served the meat,  as usual. But this time she gave only a tiny piece to her father and a tiny piece to her mother.
She said to her parents, "You ate yours, now it is our time. We are old enough."  She served most of the meat to her brothers and sisters.
The father remembered what he did while his children were young. Mother and father agreed that it was not the right thing to do. They asked for forgiveness. The children promised that they would not repeat this mistake with their own children.
Long ago Hen and Eagle were friends. One day,  Eagle found Hen under a tree resting with her hopping bags. Hen was standing on one leg.
Eagle asked Hen,  "Where is your other leg?"
Hen told Eagle,  "The shopkeeper cut off my leg and gave me these groceries in return."
Eagle asked Hen whether he could do the same. He also wanted a bag of groceries. Hen agreed.
Eagle went to the shopkeeper and asked her to cut off one of his legs in exchange for groceries. The shopkeeper accepted.
The eagle hopped on one leg all the way home. But he was happy with the things the shopkeeper gave him.
When Eagle reached home,  he found Hen with both her legs.
Eagle was furious and chased Hen. But he never caught her. Instead,  Eagle always looks out for Hen's children. Whenever he catches one,  he eats it.
The day that we’re waiting for is coming. It’s going to be Chiefs versus Aces on this very field. Come and watch! Come with your vuvuzela!
“Chiefs, the cup must come to sleep at home,” said Coach. “I want us to work together as a team to defeat the Aces. We must attack cleverly, defend well, and pass to each other.”
Soon we were practising hard. “Pass the ball, pass it, Portia Modise!”“Defend, defend, Jomo!”“There it is, there it is, into the goals!”Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! sounded the vuvuzela.
“You played wonderfully, my beautiful Chiefs!You attacked cleverly, you defended well, and you passed to each other. You played as a real team!”
“High five to all of you! Well done!” said Coach.
We went home really tired, but the practice was good.“When is the real match, Coach?” we asked.
Finally the day came. “Halala Chiefs, halala! It’s going to be a good game. The cup is ours!” said Coach. Po-o-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o-o! sounded the vuvuzela.
And then there was a surprise. “What beautiful kit!  Thank you, Coach. We play the best, and now we also look the best!”
One million years ago, a soccer gem was formed.When it was discovered, people fought to possess this powerful jewel.
During the first soccer world war the gem was lost. No one knew what happened to it.Many years passed. The soccer gem would only be found when the greatest soccer star was born.
Not long ago, there was a boy named David. He was from a poor family.
Before David's father died, he gave the soccer gem to his son.At first, the boy didn't know the power of the jewel.
He was a teenager when he first used the gem to play soccer.David hadn't gone to school. But with the gem's power, he won every single match he played with his friends.
He realised that he could make money for his family from playing soccer. He would open a shop for his mother, and send his brother and sisters to school.
David became the best professional soccer player that anyone had seen.It was even said that he was from another world!
The soccer star who will never be forgotten!
There are shoes for all occasions.
Shoes for when the sun shines go 'flip-flop'.
Shoes for ladies at a party go 'clip-clop'.
Shoes for girls and boys at school go 'tough-turf'.
Shoes for daddies at work go 'shift-shaft'.
My favourite shoes are quiet and clean.Not like my brother's noisy, muddy boots!
My favourite shoes are prettier than my sister's smelly running shoes.My favourite shoes are for when I am relaxing.
These are the shoes I wear at home. They are soft. They hug my feet and go 'fush-fush'.
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung’s shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife’s homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize’s shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. “It started well,” thinks Mkhize. “But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I’m reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf.”
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung’s kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize’s kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung’s shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. “What are you staring at?” asks Jabu. “Your kota! It looks bigger than mine,” says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu’s is bigger. “Something is not right here,” says Zodwa. “I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize’s shop is not busy anymore.” Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies, “Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!”
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she’s curious. She asks them what’s wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, “A kota is a quarter of a loaf!” Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, “The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters.”
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. “So, he is stealing bread from us!” she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize’s shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren’t new customers. “Oh, hello again kids,” he mutters, “how can I help you?” “Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter,” says Zodwa, pointing at her kota. “I want a quarter kota or my money back,” she adds firmly.
“Is it true Mr Mkhize? You’ve been cheating us!” cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. “What are you saying about me?” he protests. “I’m not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!”
Then Zodwa says quietly, “We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!” Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
“OK,” he says eventually, “I will give you your money back. “And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas,” speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, “I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas.”
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.
It is break time at Siyafunda Primary School. Nomsa,  Jabu and Zodwa have just sat down in the shade to enjoy their lunch. Today Nomsa and Zodwa brought food from home,  but Jabu is eating a kota from Mr Mkhize's shop.
"Mmmm,  this cheese is creamy! Mr Mkhize's kotas are the best!" exclaims Jabu licking his fingers. Tebogo is sitting nearby and overhears Jabu. He can't believe his ears! Tebogo asks,  "Did you just say there's cheese on Mkhize's kota? Did you say Mkhize's kotas are the best? Are you joking?"
"Haa! You don't know Mr Mkhize! He's changed his ways and this kota speaks for itself," says Jabu pointing at his kota. The kota is stuffed with chips,  polony and atchar,  and covered in creamy melting cheese. Tebogo is impressed,  "It's true,  and the bread is really packed with filling!" Just then Scelo arrives with his lunch and Tebogo says to his friend,  "Hey Scelo,  look at this kota!"
Jabu notices Scelo's face and asks,  "Why you are looking so serious!"  Scelo puts his kota on the bench next to Jabu's kota. "I got my kota from Mr Motaung. The kotas are equal in size,  but mine has less filling!" "Yes," says Nomsa,  "that's exactly why so many kids are buying from Mr Mkhize's shop now."
"So Mr Mkhize is a changed man? He used to slice one loaf of bread into five parts to make his kotas!" says Tebogo. "Ah!" replies Nomsa,  "that was not a kota at all!" "Why was it not a kota?" asks Scelo.
"Ha Scelo!" laughs Nomsa. "Don't you remember what our teacher taught us about fractions? Cutting one loaf of bread into five equal pieces does not give us quarters. It gives us fifths."  Scelo thinks,  then he says,  "I remember! Each part of a whole divided into 5 equal parts is ⅕ of the whole. Each part of a whole divided into 4 equal pieces is ¼ of the whole."
Zodwa interrupts,  "But hey guys,  what is going on with Mr Motaung's kota's? They're a quarter of a loaf,  but they contain less than Mr Mkhize's kotas." Jabu frowns and says to the group,  "If Motaung is having problems and goes out of business,  then Mkhize will have no competition. What if Mkhize gets greedy and goes back to his bad old ways?"
A few days later,  Mr Motaung is getting ready to sell lunch at break time. He's worried. Lately,  fewer and fewer learners are buying from him. Mr Motaung asks himself,  "Why are they all flocking to Mkhize? What is it that he's doing that I'm not? I thought we were selling the same kota at the same price."
Jabu on his way from Mr Mkhize's shop passes by Mr Motaung's shop. He calls the boy over,  "Hey Jabu,  how are you? I've not seen you for some time."  Mr Motaung's eyes are not on Jabu but the kota Jabu is carrying! He realises that the kota has got more chips,  more cheese,  more polony and more atchar! Mr Motaung smiles because he has figured out Mkhize's secret.
The next time Nomsa and Zodwa are buying kotas,  Mkhize gives them a gift. "Wait a minute,  I've got a surprise for you. Soon I'll be selling fruit at my shop. Here are some sweet juicy apples to try for free. Please share with your friends."
The girls are delighted. "Thank you Mr Mkhize!" they say at the same time. They decide to share the apples with Jabu,  Tebogo and Scelo,  and go to find them in the yard.
Zodwa tells the boys,  "Mr Mkhize gave us these apples to share. He wants to sell them at his shop." Nomsa puts the apples on the bench so that they can all count them. "Well," says Tebogo,  "we can each have an equal number of apples. But there's one apple left over."
"Let's cut that remaining apple into three equal parts," suggests Jabu. "What are those equal parts called?" mutters Nomsa to herself. "Thirds! Cut the apple into thirds! Three equal parts," says Scelo proudly.
"No,  let's give that leftover apple to our maths teacher!" says Zodwa. The friends agree that it's a good suggestion to give the apple to Ms Nkosi after break.
The next week,  Jabu and Nomsa are waiting for Zodwa at break. Zodwa arrives with her kota. "Look,  Motaung is back in business!" she says. Zodwa puts her kota on the bench and the three of them compare the kotas. "Wow!" says Jabu,  "that kota is bigger than a quarter! And look at all those chips!" "I bet this cost a lot extra? How does Mr Motaung make a profit?" asks Nomsa suspiciously.
After break,  as they head back to class,  Zodwa takes her friends to read the notice board outside Mr Motaung's shop. Jabu and Nomsa can't believe their eyes when they read the following on the notice: Get your supersize kota! Only R3 more! A third of a loaf with extra chips and extra sauce. With polony OR cheese!
My mother planted.She planted a small garden.She planted a small garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a small garden.  He planted a small garden of flowers.
My mother weeded in both gardens.
My father watered in both gardens.
My parents and I worked in the small gardens.My sister and I  harvested the flowers and peas.
The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.
Don was a big baboon. He was a bully.
He was the baboon chief.
His followers gave him a special cloth.
"I will wear this on my head," said Don.
"Everyone follow my orders. Do not question me!" shouted Don.
So,  the followers followed their chief. If Don jumped,  everyone jumped.
But the band on Don's head was too tight.
He touched his sore head. The baboons touched their heads.
"This hurts," said Don. "This hurts," they copied.
"This is too tight!" "This is too tight," they copied.
Don fell down,  over a cliff. They all copied him.
The baboon chief died. His followers were hurt,  but they lived.
Hi siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu lembe na lembe, tiko ri tsundzuka valweri va ntshunxeko.Vanhu lava a va lwela milawu leyi a tshikilela vantima va Afrika-Dzonga.
Hi siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu 1960, vaakatiko va Sharpville na Langa va sungule ku tereka.Va machile va lwa na nawu wo famba na mapasi wa mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu.“Amandlaa! Ngawethuu! Amandlaa! Ngawethuu!” ku huwelela ntshungu hi siku ra kona.
ESharpville, a ku yimbeleriwa no machiwa hi kurhula ku ya exiticini xa maphorisa.Loko maphorisa va vona ntshungu, maphorisa ma hlasela vamachi.Vanhu va baleka, van’wana va vaviseka, van’wana va lahlekeriwa hi vutomi.
Siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu ri sungule ri tsundzukiwa tanihi Siku ra Sharpville.Endzhaku ka nhlawulo wa mani na mani wa 1994, siku leri ri endliwile holideyi.Hi siku leri, tiko ri tsundzuka vanhu lava lahlekeriweke hi vutomi. I ndlela yo khensa eka vona.
Afrika-Dzonga ri na Vumbiwa bya xidemokirasi. Lava tsaleke Vumbiwa byintswa va lave leswaku ku van a ku xixima timfanelo ta ximunhu.Vumbiwa bya Afrika-Dzonga byi andlarile timfanelo na mitirho ya lava tshamaka etikweni. Vanhu hinkwavo va ringana.
Lembe na lembe hi siku ra 21 Nyenyankulu i holideyi. Tihofisi na swikolo swa pfala.I siku ro tlangela timfanelo ta ximunhu. I siku ro tlangela ku ringana ka vanhu.Vanhu va tlangela na ku xixima siku leri hi tindlela to hambana.
Vana va nga tlangela siku leri hi ku vulavula hi timfanelo ta vona.Ina, vana na vona va na timfanelo!Timfanelo ta vana i timfanelo to hlawuleka ta ximunhu. Timfanelo ta vana va le hansi ka 18 wa malembe.
Vana hinkwavo va ringana hi timfanelo. Wa ti tiva timfanelo ta wena?“Mfanelo yo hlayisiwa,” ku vula Ntombi.“Mfanelo yo va na vito!” ku huwelela Nsuku.“Mfanelo yo tshama etikweni ra mina kumbe rin’wana,” ku vula Shadrack.
“Mfanelo yo sirheleriwa,” ku vula Melanie endzhaku.“Mfanelo yo dyondza,” ku vula Arnold.“Mfanelo YO KA U NGA vavisiwi kumbe ku xanisiwa,” ku vula Nhlayiselo.
Leti hi tin’wana ta timfanelo leti vana va nga na tona.Hi na timfanelo na mitirho. Hi na timfanelo na vutihlamuleri.Hi yihi mitirho na vutihlamuleri swa hina?“Ntirho yo endla mitirho ya mina ya le kaya,” ku vula Ann
“Vutihlamuleri byo langutela miri na miehleketo swa mina. Swi fanele ku va eka rihanyo lerinene,” ku vula Nsuku.“Ntirho wo khoma van’wana leswi hi lavaka va hi khomisa swona,” ku vula Cheyeza.“Vutihlamuleri byo tirha kahle exikolweni,” ku vula Mixo.
“Ndzi na vutihlamuleri byo hlonipha timfanelo ta van’wana,” ku vula Lerato.Hinkwerhu hi na vutihlamuleri byo hlonipha timfanelo ta van’wana.Siku ra Timfanelo ta Ximunhu i siku ra ku ringana ka timfanelo ta vanhu hinkwavo.
Afrika-Borwa e hweditše tokologo ka di 27 Moranang 1994.E be e le la mathomo bathobaso ba bouta dikgethong tša Afrika-Borwa.Re keteka mafelelo a kgethologanyo ya merafe, le mathomo a temokrasi.
Temokrasi ke mokgwa wo batho ka moka ba bagolo ba kgonago go bouta.Batho ba bouta le go kgetha baetapele ba mmušo dikgethong.Mmušo wa kgethologanyo ya merafe wa Afrika-Borwa o be o sa dumelele Bathobaso go bouta.
Balwela tokologo ba bantši ba be ba sa kwane le mmušo wa kgethologanyo ya merafe.Nelson Mandela ke molwela tokologo wa go tsebega kudu.O ile a ya kgolegong mengwaga ye 27 ka ge a be a lwela temokrasi.
Melokoloko ya batho e tsogetše mafelong a go bouta ka di 27 Moranang 1994.Lefelo la go bouta ke mo re boutelago gona.Ge re bouta, re kgetha batho ba re nyakago ba eta pele mmušo.
Batho ka moka ba be ba thabetše go bouta dikgethong tša mathomo tša temokrasi Afrika-Borwa.Melokoloko e be e ye ye metelele.Letšatši le be le fiša kudu.Fela batho ka moka ba thabetše tokologo.
Nelson Mandela o gopola letšatši le lebotse le ka kgahlego.Ga a lebale melokoloko ye metelele ya batho ye e bego e bonala mebileng.O re seswantšho se sa dikgetho se ka se tloge monaganong wa gagwe.
Maafrika-Borwa ka moka a mengwaga ye 18 le go feta a ka bouta.Nageng ka bophara, re be re letetše go ya mafelong a go kgetha.Re eme go fihlela bošego, mafelelong ka moka ra kgona go bouta.
Mafelo a go bouta a ile a tswalelwa. Dibouto tša thoma go balwa.Ke nako ya go tseba gore batho ba kgethile mang gore a buše naga.Batho ba dimilione tše 20 ba boutile ka di 27 Moranang 1994.
Mokgatlo wa African National Congress o hweditše dibouto tše dintši kudu.ANC ya thopa dikgetho tša mathomo tša temokrasi!Nelson Mandela e be e le moetapele wa ANC. Ke yena mopresidente wa mathomo wa Afrika-Borwa ya temokrasi.
Mmušo o dirile letšatši la 27 Moranang la bokhutšogohle, gore re kgone go le keteka ngwaga ka ngwaga.Letšatši le le emetše khutšo le poelano.Re le keteka ka go kgobokana ditediamong ka ge le le bohlokwa.Re le keteka ka mmino, direto le dipolelo.
Ka letšatši la tokologo, re hlompha balwela tokologo ba rena.Re keteka bofelo bja kgethologanyo ya merafe.Re keteka ditokelo tša batho ka moka tša go bouta.Ebile re tshepiša le go netefatša tokologo le tekano ya batho ka moka. Ye ke yona temokrasi!
Dikgetho tša Afrika-Borwa di rulaganywa ke Independent Electoral Commission (IEC).IEC e netefatša gore dikgetho tša rena di laetša “tokelo ya boikgethelo”. Na o nagana gore seo se ra goreng?Nyakišiša go ya pele ka mošomo wa mokgatlo wo.
Long time ago,  there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark,  they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said,  "I am a louse. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu."
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate,  drank,  and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left,  they had a bad thought. They said,  "No,  it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse."  Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone,  and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
Chat was born blind. Her eyes had never seen her parents, or her brothers and sisters. She knew their faces by touch.
One day, Chat was strolling in the garden. She liked the sweet scent of flowers. She loved to touch their soft petals.
Chat wished she could see flowers, just once. "They are lovely," she said to herself.
Every day, Chat walked in the garden. She knew her way around. Today, she raised her head to the skies.
Suddenly, she heard thunder and lightning. "I need to hurry back to the house," Chat thought.
Rain began to fall. Chat slipped, lost her balance and fell. She hit her head on a stone.
When Chat woke up, there were people around her. "What happened?" she asked.
"You fell and bumped your head," her father said. "Thank God you are fine," said her mother.
"Daddy, mummy?" asked Chat. She also called the names of her brothers and sisters. "Please, get me a flower."Everyone was surprised.
Her sister returned with a flower. Chat held it gently. "It is so lovely," she said.
Her family looked at one another. "Chat, can you see the flower?" her mother asked.
Chat played with the flower in her hand. "You are all so beautiful, just like this flower," she smiled.
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung's shop,  the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife's homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize's shop,  the chips are nearly ready,  but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. "It started well," thinks Mkhize. "But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I'm reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf."
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung's kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize's kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung's shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. "What are you staring at?" asks Jabu. "Your kota! It looks bigger than mine," says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough,  Jabu's is bigger. "Something is not right here," says Zodwa. "I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize's shop is not busy anymore." Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies,  "Well,  I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!"
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she's curious. She asks them what's wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together,  "A kota is a quarter of a loaf!" Nomsa still looks confused,  so Zodwa explains,  "The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise,  they are not quarters."
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. "So,  he is stealing bread from us!" she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize's shop to complain. She marches off,  holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren't new customers. "Oh,  hello again kids," he mutters,  "how can I help you?" "Mr Mkhize,  I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter," says Zodwa,  pointing at her kota. "I want a quarter kota or my money back," she adds firmly.
"Is it true Mr Mkhize? You've been cheating us!" cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. "What are you saying about me?" he protests. "I'm not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!"
Then Zodwa says quietly,  "We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!" Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
"OK," he says eventually,  "I will give you your money back. "And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas," speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear,  "I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas."
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him,  and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung,  and everyone is happy.
Mod the toad was tired of living in water.
"Be careful," said the turtle. "Your skin will dry out."
But Mod was curious. She hopped away.
She looked all around.
She met a purple chameleon next to a puddle of water.
The chameleon started turning pink! Mod jumped away.
Then she saw a hyena starting a fire.
The fire spread around Mod. She was afraid.
The fire burned her skin. She jumped back,  into the puddle.
But her skin was already full of blisters.
Mod found a home under a rock. Her new skin was dry and rough.
Now only frogs have smooth skin and live near water.
There was a dark jungle.
It was a big dark jungle. There were lots of trees and a narrow path. Many animals and birds lived here.
One day,  all the animals came together. "Did you hear?" asked Tota,  the parrot. "Yes," said Hirni,  the deer. "What?" asked Darpok,  the rabbit. "We have a school in the jungle," answered Zhoola,  the monkey. Mota,  the elephant wondered,  "Hmph?" Lamboo,  the giraffe said,  "Oh,  good!" Dheema,  the snail squealed,  "Hurry,  let's go!"
Tota,  the parrot flew ahead. Zhoola,  the monkey jumped from tree to tree. Poorakha,  the python slithered fast. "Here!" shouted Tota. "Can you read?" "It is upside down,  I think," said Zhoola hanging by the branch. Poorakha concluded,  "Hisssss. No one can read."
Soon,  all the other friends joined them. Lamboo looked over the tree. "No one here," he said. Zhoola repeated,  "No one here." Tota proposed,  "Look carefully!" Pilloo,  the little bear declared,  "I found a room!"
"I found a swing",  announced Dheema. "What are these blocks?" Darpok wanted to know. "What is this?" was Zhoola's question. Poorakha explained,  "I believe,  this is a pencil."
Moto and Lamboo found a classroom. They called the others,  "Look,  what is this?" Everyone came with school bags. They began shouting,  "Teacher! Teacher! Where is our teacher?" No one knew.
Then they heard a roar. They heard a loud roar. They heard a louder roar. Poorakha was worried. Dheema was scared. Tota hid behind the board. Lamboo and Zhoola were puzzled.
Who is this? "Hup!" said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke. They all looked at the teacher. Up and down carefully. Then they looked at one another.
The teacher turned to write on the black board. "Jump," said Zhoola. "Fly! Said Tota. Thump,  thump,  thump ran Mota. "Run,  run run fast," screamed Dheema. "Bhagoooo," they all shouted together. When the teacher turned. There was no one in the class."
Once there was a girl called Linda. She lived with her two sisters, brother and mother. She was a very happy and active girl.
She had a best friend called Stacy. They trusted each other and always shared their secrets.
Every Tuesday, Linda and Stacy would go to the movies because free popcorn was served.
After watching a movie, they would go to the park and listen to music.They would enjoy ice-creams.
This was Linda's happy day. Watching a good movie, with free popcorn.
Then music and ice-cream at the park with Stacy.
Happy moments do not last forever. Learn to cherish your happy moments…
…and the people you share those moments with.
There is a boy named Rodney. He lives with his family. His mother and father are Jamima and Mike. His sisters are Suzy and Lola. Rodney is the last born child.
Rodney loves playing chess. He loves it so much that whenever he plays chess, he does not talk.
One day, when Rodney was at school playing chess, he realised that the game could be about his family.
Mike is the King. Jamima is the queen, which is why she has power. Suzy and Lola are the knights and bishops. Rodney is the pawn because he is younger.
After realising this, Rodney ran home to tell his family.
They all laughed at him at first. But later they understood. Rodney explained their roles and why he is a pawn.
Rodney told his mom that she is the queen, and his father a king. His sisters are knights and bishops.
Rodney is a pawn because he likes adventure! He can become anything he wants, even if he has to make some sacrifices.
Magezi slowly starts drumming on his black and white drum.
Children gather and sing along with the drum.
They sing, "Kasi Masingitani i nkata mani? I nkata mfana kuloni."
Women dance around to the sound of Magezi's drum.
Men roll on the ground, and move up and down, to the sound of Magezi's drum.
Old women sway their hips and ululate. Everyone enjoys Magezi's lovely drumming.
Mdungwazi rolls his eyes, and does his funny dance movements!
Old men whistle and shake their heads to the beat of Magezi's drum.
It is hot sunny Saturday morning on the farm. Maya, Duksie and Doobie are helping Mama K in her vegetable garden. The children work all morning. They dig compost into the soil. They weed and water. Then they harvest what is ripe and ready. Today each of the children will take home freshly picked strawberries, spinach and carrots.
Mama K always gives the children a treat for helping her. Sometimes its cake or chocolate, or she buys longsweets that look like snakes. Sometimes it's apples, pears or oranges. Mama K has only one rule. “Share it fair!” The children know they must share the treats equally, so they all get the same amount.
Today Mama K has baked a round strawberry cake with pink icing and berries from her garden. The childrenwait on the grass for their treat. “Here you go!” smiles Mama K. “But remember the rule. Everyone must get the same. Share it fair! Don't fight!”
Maya has the first turn to share the cake. She uses the knife to trace lines in the icing. The others watch her. She does not cut the cake yet. The others must first agree if her way is fair. “I think I will make two cuts down like this. Now we have three slices, all the same!” Maya shows them.
“No way!” says Duksie, “the one in the middle is much too big!” Doobie also shakes his head. Maya laughs and shrugs and tells Duksie to try.
“Here! Pass me the knife, I'll do it. Easy peasy!” chants Duksie. First she rubs out Maya's pattern in the icing and licks her fingers.
Then she makes one cut across and one down. “Look, I made my three slices!” “That's not fair!” shout Mayaand Doobie together.
“Share it fair! The pieces must be the same size and shape,” adds Doobie. “Why don't you try Doobie, SmartyPants?” smirks Duksie. “I bet you can't do it!”
“I wish the cake was a square or a rectangle, and then it would be easy!” says Doobie thoughtfully. “Or, if there were four of us to share the round cake that would also be easy,” says Maya.
And then! A picture comes into Doobie's head. He sees the sparkling silver badge at the front of his father's big red truck. On Sundays he helps his dad to wash the truck, and to polish the shiny badge. “I've got it! I've got it!I know how to do it,” yells Doobie.
“You are full of surprises, Doobie,” says Duksie sweetly. “How did you work it out?” Maya asks. Doobie smiles to himself. For now it his secret. Later, he will tell his dad.
First he uses a knife to smooth Duksie's lines in the icing. Then he traces three lines on the cake. It looksjust like the badge on his dad's truck, with three equal parts.
Just then Mama K comes out of her house. She is carrying a tray with three glasses of cold strawberry juice. “Look Mama K! Doobie found the way to cut the cake into three equal pieces,” Maya tells her. “Well done Doobie,three equal slices! You shared fairly, I'm proud of you all. Now cut the cake and drink your juice. It's time to go home. I will give you plates to take your pieces of cake.”
Maya cuts along Doobie's lines to make three equal slices. Just for fun, the children stack the slices on top of each other to check that they are the same size. Yes they are!
Doobie's dad arrives to pick up the children, and Doobie runs off to meet him. He can't wait to tell his dad how the badge on the truck helped him to solve a very tricky problem!
There are shoes for all occasions.
Shoes when the sun shines go 'flip-flop'.
Shoes for ladies going to a party go 'clip-clop'.
Shoes for girls and boys going to school go 'tough-turf'.
Shoes for daddies going to work go 'shift-shaft'.
My favourite shoes are those I wear at home. Those go 'fush-fush'.They are soft. They hug my feet.
They are cleaner than my brother's muddy gumboots.
They are prettier than my sister's smelly running shoes.My shoes are for when you are relaxed, with no cares in the world.
Frog and Snake are friends.
Frog says,  "Come with me to visit my mother."
"Thank you," Snake says. "Who will watch our homes?"
"I will watch your homes," says Monkey.
Frog puts white ants in a bag for her mother.
Frog and Snake leave at dawn. They go into a forest.
They meet a gang of squirrels. Snake is afraid.
Frog protects her friend.
They are hungry when they get to Mother's house.
They wash and get ready to eat.
"Snake,  please sit up," says Frog.
Snake tries to sit up,  but she is not a frog.
"I cannot sit up like a frog," says Snake.
Frog will not listen.
"You do not understand me. I am going home."
Snake is annoyed. "I thought Frog was my friend."
Thami wakes up early every day.
Thami's mother helps him to get ready for school.
Thami's school is far away from his home.He walks to school with his friends.
One day, Thami's mother went to work early.He woke up late.His friends walked to school without him.
Thami was walking alone through the forest.He heard strange sounds near the trees.
Thami heard voices behind the bushes.He started to run. He ran all the way to school.
Thami ran into his classroom!Later, his teacher talked to the class about the dangers of walking alone.
Now Thami makes sure that he always walks with friends.
One special Friday Yusuf ’s father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woollen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf ’s eyes brighten when Papa says, “Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you.”
A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer’s Corner.Gulls circle the sky. “Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” they cry. “What will you bring back for Yusuf?”Papa rings his bell. “Wait and see what it will be!”
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf ’s grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa’s arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple.Papa sings as he works: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf ’s father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls. “What will you do to help the turtles?”Papa said, “We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one.”
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. Mother wants a new dress.“Don’t be silly,” says Ouma. “You’ll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There’s not so many fish left in the sea.”Yusuf holds Ouma’s hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. “What is for supper?”
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls.“There’s enough sea for everybody,” said Yusuf ’s father. He showed them the fishing licence that had been Oupa Salie’s. “Waves for all. Water for free.”
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What will Yusuf ’s father bring from the ocean?”
Yusuf’s father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf’s father untangles the nets, singing to the shark: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa’s finger.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What did you bring back for Yusuf?”As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. “A lucky shark tooth for my boy.”At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
Nomalanga lived with her parents in a homestead called Kuthuleni. She was the only child in the family and she woke up early every day to graze the cattle.Nomalanga's beauty was like the rising sun.
Nomalanga was adored by all boys where she lived, and she was envied by all the girls.  One day, a group of girls decided to kidnap her.  That day after grazing the cattle, she was stopped by the girls as she returned home.
"Hello Nomalanga, beauty queen of eKuthuleni," greeted Jojo, a tall and scrawny girl. "Hello dear sisters," Nomalanga replied. "You are coming with us to the other side of Jevu mountain," stated Cebile forcefully. Nomalanga was very frightened.
They all climbed mountain Jevu, huffing and puffing until they reached top.  Suddenly, the girls grabbed Nomalanga and put her in a big sack. Nomalanga was kicking and screaming, "Sisters, I am begging you, let me go!"
"Shut up Miss Beautiful! We are tired of your beauty and how everyone praises you for it," responded Jojo angrily."What message do you want us to give to your parents after we are done with you?" asked Zozo.
Nomalanga began to sing a song that her grandmother had taught her. It was a magical song. "Gumbeqe, gomboqo, qekelele, zwi." Her voice sounded as sweet as honey. "Gomboqo, qekelele, gumbeqe, zwi. Qekelele, gumbeqe, gomboqo, zwi."
As she continued to sing the song, Nomalanga grew bigger and bigger, and her skin turned to gold.  All the girls fell on the ground. They watched fearfully as Nomalanga became a golden statue on top of mountain Jevu!
In this way, Nomalanga's beauty continued even beyond her life.
On Sunday, Jimmy Zogba scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your zebra hair? Your hair’s so plain, like you don’t care.”
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your fake tattoo? Your skin’s so boring. You are too.”
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your bling? Your teeth are wonky, that’s the thing.”
That day, Rafiki walked home slowly.
“Auntie, can I have zebra hair?” “I can’t cut you zebra hair. Actually, I wouldn’t dare.”
“My skin’s so boring, Sisi. Can you make a fake tattoo?”“You don’t need one to look like you.”
“Mkhulu, I wish I had some bling.” “Bling, my child, don’t mean a thing.”
The next weekend, Santi Ramires scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
“Hey, Rafiki! Looking fine!”
Rafiki shrugged. “I look like me; this style is mine.”
Tebello o hodisitswe ke nkgono le ntate moholo wa hae Lesotho. Nkgono le ntate moholo wa hae ba ile ba mohodisa hantle.Letsatsi le leng o ne a eya naheng ho ya hlokomela dinku, letsatsi le latelang a eya sekolong. O ne a kena sekolo ka tsela eo.
Ha Tebello a ne a hlokometse dinku, a bona hore ho na le diphoofolo tse ding le dimela.Tebello o ne a hlile a rata ho sheba dintho ka hloko. O ne a tsotella dintho tse mopotapotileng.Tebello o ile a holela mahaeng, sena se morutile ka tsa tlhao.
Tebello o ne a rata ho ithuta Science sekolong.Ba mobolella hore a se leke hohang. Bare Science e thata hape ke thuto ya bashanyana eseng banana.Pele o qadile a ba mamela. Metswalle ya hae sekolong e ne e etsa tsa Bonono le Botjhaba.O ne a batla ho etsa thuto e fapaneng.
Tebello o ratile ho ithutela Science. O ne a tseba hore Science e ke se e mohlole.Tebello o ile a kopa ho ithutela Science, qetellong ba modumella hore a e etse.A qala ho ithuta Science dilemo tse pedi pele a qeta sekolo!
Tebello a sebetsa ka thata, ho fumana bana ba bang bao esaleng ba ithutela Science.Bohlale le ho rata ho bala dibuka, ho ile hwa mothusa hore a kene university tse ngata.Tebello o kene university tse ngata.A ithuta dintho tsohle dilemong tse pedi empa a pasa!
Tebello o ne a rata Chemistry haholo. Chemistry ke karolo engwe ya science.O ne a tseba hore o batla hoya University hoya ithuta chemistry.A hla a bala dibuka tsa hae.
Tebello aya University ya Lesotho. O ile University kamora ho pasa hantle sekolong.E ne e le moithutwana ya bohlale a bile a sebetsa ka thata haholo. O ne a qeta nako e ngata ya hae ka laboratoring ya Science.O ile a atleha hofumana scholarship sa hoya ithuta Canada.
Tebello o ne a rata ho ithuta ka Science, empa o ne a kgenne ha a ne a siya ba lelapa le metswalle ya hae Afrika.O ile a siya naha ya habo hobane o ne a batla hoba setsebi se seholo sa Science.
Tebello a kopana le metswalle e metjha Canada.Ba ne ba bua puo e fapaneng, empa English ya ba thusa ho buisana.Canada teng, lehlwa le lengata dibakeng tsa bodulo jwalo ka dithabeng tsa Lesotho.Ha lelwa le leteng dithabeng tsa Lesotho, batho ba apara dikobo. Haele Canada batho ba apara dijase.Tebello a fumana scholarship sa hoithutela Science.
Ho ile hwa latela University ya Amerika.Kamora dilemo lemo tsa ho ithuta, Tebello a kgutlela hae South Afrika. O ne a batla ho fana ka tsebo ya hae ho batho ba habo.Tebello o ne a dumela hore ha ho letho le ka mohlolang.
Kajeno, Tebello ke Professor ya Science. O ruta Universithing, hape o na le laboratori ya hae ya Science.Professor Nyokong o e ntse dipatlisiso tse ntjha tsa ho thusa batho ka lefu le lebe la cancer. O thusa le ba ithutelang Science.Professor Nyokong, o thusa batho haholoholo batho ba Afrika.
Mosebetsi wa hae o e ketsa tsebo ya Science, ho thuseng batho ho hlola mafu ana a kotsi.Bophelo ba hae bo bontsha bohlokwa ba ho dumela ho wena le ho se lahle tshepo.Professor Tebello Nyokong o thusa MaAfrika.
My friend Dennis from next door called me. "Come and see my new dog," said Dennis.
The dog had black spots and a big head. It frightened me! I felt worried that it would bite me.
We took the new dog for a walk, Dennis and me.
The dog wagged its tail.
It barked!
Then it peed on me! On my boot! Yuuuk!
Dennis took a tissue and wiped off the pee.
I felt that Dennis was a good friend to me.
Afeefah is a baby white rhinoceros.Rangers rescued her from the bush.
Her mum was killed by poachers.The rangers took Afeefah to a place of safety.
Afeefah's heart was broken.And, she was afraid that the poachers would return to take her horn.
Slowly, Afeefah made friends.She felt safe and played in the mud.She drank nutritious milk at the sanctuary.
One day Afeefah asked her friend Aaminah, "Why do they want our horns?"Aaminah snorted, "They believe that our horns are magical!"
"But our horns are not magical!" cried Afeefah."No, of course not. Horns are the same as hair and nails," said Aaminah.
Afeefah and Aaminah are the last of their kind.The white rhinoceros is nearly extinct.They are almost all gone from our world.
We can save the rhino and other animals that are almost extinct.What can you do?Find out more!
——Kopano le Lereko ba be ba ja dikuku tšeo mmago bona a ba paketšego.Dikuku tšeo di be di elela tsina.
Lereko o ile a botšiša mma, “Naa tsina e tšwa kae?”“Ngwanaka, dinose di dira tsina,” gwa rialo mma.
“Dinose di dira tsina le modula go tšwa matšobeng,” mma a tšwela pele.“Ge dinose di kgoboketša modula, di dulafatša matšoba.”
Go dulafatŠa ke go thuša dibjalwa go ata ka go phatlalatša modula.Modula o dira karolo ya peu.
“Dinose di rwala modula go tloga dibjalong go ya dibjalong. Di dulafatŠa dimela,” mma a hlaloša.“Dinose di dira gape ditšweletšwa tše bohlokwa.”
“Ke a tseba! Re humana tsina dinoseng,” Kopano a rialo.Lereko a tlatša, “Tsina e tloga e le bose ebile e a latswega.
“Tsina e šomišwa gape mereng le dišeng,” mma a rialo.“Dipilisi le lerole tša go dirwa ka mere le diša di dirilwe ka tsina.”
“Tsina e thuša go fodiša megolo, sehuba le go gohlola.”
“Tsina e thuša go fodiša dikgobadi le dintho tša mollo.”
“E fela le gopole, bana ba ka, tsina ga se e lokele bana.” E ka ba lwatša kudu,” mma a ba lemoša.
“Naa, bjale go reng dinose di le bohlokwa?” mma a botšiša.“Di dulafatša matšoba!” gwa rialo Lereko.“Le go dira tsina!” gwa rialo Kopano.
Go tloga letšatši leo, Kopano le Lereko ba ile ba thoma go hlompha dinose.
It is break time at Siyafunda Primary School. Nomsa, Jabu and Zodwa have just sat down in the shade to enjoy their lunch. Today Nomsa and Zodwa brought food from home, but Jabu is eating a kota from Mr Mkhize's shop.
“Mmmm, this cheese is creamy! Mr Mkhize's kotas are the best!” exclaims Jabu licking his fingers. Tebogo is sitting nearby and overhears Jabu. He can't believe his ears! Tebogo asks, “Did you just say there's cheese on Mkhize's kota? Did you say Mkhize's kotas are the best? Are you joking?”
“Haa! You don't know Mr Mkhize! He's changed his ways and this kota speaks for itself,” says Jabu pointing at his kota. The kota is stuffed with chips, polony and atchar, and covered in creamy melting cheese. Tebogo is impressed. Just then Scelo arrives with his lunch and Tebogo says to his friend, “Hey Scelo, look at this kota!”
Jabu notices Scelo's face and asks, “Why you are so serious!” Scelo puts his kota on the bench next to Jabu's kota. “I got my kota from Mr Motaung. The kotas are equal in size, but mine has less filling!” “Yes,” says Nomsa, “that's exactly why so many kids are buying from Mr Mkhize's shop now.”
“So Mr Mkhize is a changed man? He used to slice one loaf of bread into five parts to make his kotas!” says Tebogo. “Ah!” replies Nomsa, “that was not a kota at all!” “Why was it not a kota?” asks Scelo.
“Ha Scelo!” laughs Nomsa. “Don't you remember what our teacher taught us about fractions? Cutting one loaf of bread into five equal pieces does not give us quarters. It gives us fifths.” Scelo thinks, then he says, “I remember! Each part of a whole divided into 5 equal parts is. of the whole. Each part of a whole divided into 4 equal pieces is ¼ of the whole.”
Zodwa interrupts, “But hey guys, what is going on with Mr Motaung's kota's? They're a quarter of a loaf, but they contain less than Mr Mkhize's kotas.” Jabu frowns and says to the group, “If Motaung is having problems and goes out of business, then Mkhize will have no competition. What if Mkhize gets greedy and goes back to his bad old ways?”
A few days later, Mr Motaung is getting ready to sell lunch at break time. He's worried. Lately, fewer and fewer learners are buying from him. Mr Motaung asks himself, “Why are they all flocking to Mkhize? I thought we were selling the same kota at the same price.”
Jabu on his way from Mr Mkhize's shop passes by Mr Motaung's shop. He calls the boy over, “Hey Jabu, how are you?” Mr Motaung's eyes are not on Jabu but on the kota Jabu is carrying! He smiles when he realises that the kota has got more chips, more cheese, more polony and more atchar than his kotas!
The next time Nomsa and Zodwa are buying kotas, Mkhize gives them a gift. “Wait a minute, I've got a surprise for you. Soon I'll be selling fruit at my shop. Here are some sweet juicy apples to try for free. Please share with your friends.”
The girls are delighted. “Thank you Mr Mkhize!” they say at the same time. They decide to share the apples with Jabu, Tebogo and Scelo, and go to find them in the yard.
Zodwa tells the boys, “Mr Mkhize gave us these apples to share. He wants to sell them at his shop.”Nomsa puts the apples on the bench so that they can all count them. “Well,” says Tebogo, “we can each have an equal number of apples. But there's one apple left over.”
“Let's cut that remaining apple into three equal parts,” suggests Jabu. “What are three equal parts called?” mutters Nomsa to herself. “Thirds! Cut the apple into thirds!” says Scelo proudly.
“No, let's give that leftover apple to our maths teacher!” says Zodwa. The friends agree that it's a good suggestion to give the apple to Ms Nkosi after break.
The next week, Jabu and Nomsa are waiting for Zodwa at break. “Look, Motaung is back in business!” she says. Zodwa puts her kota on the bench and the three of them compare their kotas. “Wow!” says Jabu, “that kota is bigger than a quarter! And look at all those chips!”“I bet this cost a lot extra?” asks Nomsa suspiciously.
After break, as they head back to class, Zodwa takes her friends to read the notice board outside Mr Motaung's shop. Jabu and Nomsa can't believe their eyes when they read the sign: Get your supersize kota third! Only R3 more! A third of a loaf with extra chips and extra sauce. With polony OR cheese!
A naughty little mouse with fur was sitting on the fence, watching the house of the Zwane family.  It was thinking about how it would get inside the house to be naughty! We all know that mice are very naughty.
The naughty little mouse soon found a way inside the house. It climbed on a table and found a computer. It started chewing the cable. Do you see the naughtiness we are talking about? Just think about long teeth biting on the computer cable!
Suddenly, a voice cried, "Don't bite that cable! The cable is my tail! You are hurting me!"The naughty little mouse with fur looked around to see who was speaking. It asked, "Who are you?"
The computer mouse answered, "I am the computer mouse.  I stay here, this is my home."The naughty little mouse with fur laughed. "How can you say you are a mouse? I am a real mouse. You don't look like me."I will show you how a real mouse behaves," said the naughty little mouse with fur.
It ran to the kitchen and stole a piece of cheese cake. It said, "Do you know how to eat cake? You don't even have a mouth! While cracking with laughter.
The computer mouse pressed itself. Click, a picture of a large cake appeared on the computer screen. The naughty little mouse with fur was impressed.
It thought for a moment, and then looked around the desk. It saw a pencil.The naughty little mouse with fur picked up the pencil and started chewing it. What a mess! Little pieces of pencil all over the desk.The naughty little mouse was pleased with itself. "Look at what a real mouse can do to wood!"
The computer mouse pressed itself again. Click. "Look at what I can do to wood," it said. Tree stumps and logs appeared on the computer screen.  "Wow," said the naughty little mouse with fur. It was even more impressed.
The naughty little mouse with fur asked the computer mouse, "Can you dance?"The naughty little mouse started to dance.
It was so busy enjoying itself, that it didn't notice the house cat looking up at the table.The cat sprung on the table!"Today I am going to show you who I am!" meowed the cat as it reached for the naughty little mouse.
The naughty little mouse with fur was terrified and started running. "Help, help!" it squeaked.The computer mouse pressed itself. Click, a video of a barking dog appeared on the computer screen. "Woof, woof!"The cat got a fright. It jumped off the table and ran away.The naughty little mouse with fur was safe.
The naughty little mouse with fur hugged the computer mouse. "Thank you, you saved my life!" it said to the computer mouse.The little mouse with fur was now behaving.
Khanyisa le Nthuseng ba boela gae, go tswa kwa sekolong.Letsatsi le a fisa, mme fa ba feta fa bookelong, ba akanya go ikhutsa mo moriting wa boemela bese kwa ntle mo go tsenwang teng.Bookelo bo bo bidiwa Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital.
“Heela, a o a itse gore Charlotte Maxeke e ne ele mang, le gore ke goreng ba neetse bookelo jo leina la gagwe?” Khanyisa a botsisa tsala ya gagwe.Nthuseng a araba, “Le fa ke fetile makgetlho a le mantsi fa, ga ke ise ke akanye ka selo se go fitlha jaanong.”
Moithuti o feta gaufi le basetsana fa ba ntse ba bua. O ithutela ka ga Saense ya tsa pholo kwa Yunibesiting ya Witwatersrand.Nka lo bolelela gore Charlotte e ne ele mang!” Ga bolela Busisiwe, Moithuti.
“Charlotte Makgomo Mannya o belegwe ka 1870,” Busisiwe a simolola.“Ijoo, bokana ka dinyaga di le 150 tse di fitileng!” ga bolela Khanyisa.Ee, go na le ditokomane tseo di farologaneng, mabapi le gore Charlotte o belegwe leng, kwa kae? Bangwe ba re o belegetswe kwa Eastern Cape, bangwe ba re kwa Limpopo,” ga tswelela Busisiwe.
“Charlotte o tsene sekolo sa Boromiwa, ko a falotseng ka maemo a kwa godimo. O ne a na le bokgoni mo malemeng le Dipalo. O ne a kwala ka isiXhosa, Dutch le Seesimane,“Charlotte o weditse dithuto tsa marematlou, ka bonako gona le barutwana ba bangwe,” Busi a emisa.“Lesego Charlotte.” Ga bua Nthuseng.“Botlhale Charlotte.” Ga bua Khanyisa.
“Charlotte o ne a le botlhale, gape a kgona go opela ka lentswe le le monate,” ga bua Busisiwe.“Morago ga phitlhelela ya ditaemane mo Aforika Borwa, Balelapa la ga gaabo Charlotte ba fudugela kwa Kimberly, Kwa Kapa Bophirima.E ne e le morutabana gape a opela le African Jubilee Choir.”
“Charlotte o ne a ya kwa England, le African Jubilee Choir. Ba ne ba opelela batho ba maemogodimo kwa London, mme ba tsaya loeto go ya Amerika.Fa ba le kwa lefatsheng leo, Charlotte a amogela, tlotlomatso ya go ithuta kwa Yunibesiting ya Wilberforce. E le Yunibesiti ya ntlha e tlhomilwe ke MaAforika le MaAmerika.”
“Kwa Amerika, kereke ya gagwe ya mo rotloetsa. A nna Mmadipolotiki. A tsenela dipuisano ka ga ditokelo tsa basadi. O ithutile le Morutegi wa Pan- Africanist e leng W.E. Du Bois.Kwa Yunibesiting ya Wilberforce, Charlotte o kopane le monna wa gagwe, Marshall Maxeke.”
“Charlotte le Marshall ba boetse mo Aforika Borwa go dira jaaka Baromiwa. Ba ne ba batla go netefatsa gore, bana botlhe ba neelwa thuto ya maemogodimo.Kereke e ne ya thusa baratani ba go simolola sekolo kwa Gauteng, go batho bantsho ba Aforika Borwa. Ba bitsa sekolo se Wilberforce Institute, ba teeletse ka Yunibesiti ya bona.”
“Charlotte a ikaegile ka dikamano tsa selegae tsa basadi ba bantsho. A le mo mokgatlhong wa basadi ba mebala yotlhe.O thusitse go rulaganya mogwanto kgatlhanong le melawana ya bokoloniale. O tsenetse megwanto ya badiri, kgatlhanong le tokafatso ya dituelo.Ene ele Moeteledipele wa kereke, morutabana, mokwadi, ele molwela ditshwanelo. E ne e le sekgantshwane!”
Busisiwe a khutlisa, “Ke ithutile ka Charlotte Maxeke gonne ke tlile mo bookelong jo! E ne e bidiwa Johannesburg Hospital, fela leina la fetolelwa go Charlotte Maxeke ka 2008.”“Charlotte Maxeke ke mosadi wa botlhokwa mo Hisitoring!” ga bua Khanyisa.“Ba tshwanetse go re ruta ka ene kwa sekolong!” ga bua Nthuseng.
“Ke tshwanetse go ya phaposing jaanong, salang sentle,” ga bua Busisiwe.“Re lebogela go abelana ka kitso! Re tla nna re gopola Mme’Charlotte, Dr Charlotte Maxeke,” ga bua Khanyisa.“Lo seka lwa lebala, basadi ba bantsho bana le maatla!” ga garela Busisiwe go basetsana.
Thabani was a young boy who was small for his age. He had an older brother who was strong, handsome, and a respected warrior. Thabani looked up to his brother Qhawekazi as his hero.
One day Qhawekazi gave Thabani a gift of a spear. Thabani was over the moon! Qhawekazi believed that Thabani would grow bigger and stronger, and that he would fight and win battles in his time.
Qhawekazi would go and fight battles from time to time. He won some battles and he came back with awards. He lost some battles and he came back with injuries.
Thabani would sing praise songs when his brother won a battle.
When Qhawekazi was not successful in a battle, Thabani would nurse his injuries.
Every morning, Thabani would wake up, take his spear and sharpen the blade on a stone. He truly appreciated this gift from his brother.
The blade was ready for use. When Qhawekazi went to battle, Thabani would wish that he was going with him. But he would always apologise and give the excuse that he was still sharpening his spear.
Thabani continued to sharpen the spear, regardless of its state. The blade got smaller and smaller until it was the size of a knife.One day Qhawekazi said, "Thabani, you are old enough now and your spear is ready for use."
"Take your spear and let's go," said Qhawekazi. He gave Thabani no chance to think. Thabani followed his brother, shivering. Qhawekazi realised too late that the spear was greatly reduced from too much sharpening.
They arrived on the battlefield. Thabani had only his very small spear and he was  terrified. Qhawekazi put his brother behind him so that he was protected. Thabani's spear was useless for battle.
Qhawekazi got injured while he was fighting. Thabani made sure that his brother could continue. He used the small spear for cutting leaves to cover the wounds of Qhawekazi and the other warriors in their group.
They came back from the battle excited. Qhawekazi got help from Thabani and Thabani got help from Qhawekazi. The enemy was defeated!
In a village there was a disagreement among people of different occupations. Everyone thought their work was the most important!
The teacher said that he had the most important occupation. “Without teachers you could not go to school and learn.”
The builder said that he had the most important occupation. “Without builders you would not have schools to learn in or houses to sleep in.”
The carpenter said that he had the most important occupation. “Without carpenters you would have no furniture for your houses and schools.”
The doctor claimed that he had the most important occupation. “Without doctors and nurses you could get sick and die.”
The farmer said that she had the most important occupation. “Without farmers you would not have food to eat.”
The student argued that students had the most important work. “Without students, there would be no teachers, builders, doctors, farmers, or carpenters.”
Eventually everyone agreed that all the occupations are important. We need teachers, builders, doctors, farmers, and carpenters. But everyone has to be a student first!
On Sunday,  Jimmy Zogba scored the winning goal.
On Monday,  the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your zebra hair? Your hair's so plain, like you don't care."
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your fake tattoo? Your skin's so boring. You are too."
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your bling? Your teeth are wonky,  that's the thing."
That day, Rafiki walked home slowly.
"Auntie, can I have zebra hair?" "I can't cut you zebra hair. Actually,  I wouldn't dare."
"My skin's so boring, Sisi. Can you make a fake tattoo?" "You don't need one to look like you."
"Mkhulu, I wish I had some bling." "Bling,  my child,  don't mean a thing."
The next weekend, Santi Ramires scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by. "Hey, Rafiki! Looking fine!"
Rafiki shrugged. "I look like me; this style is mine."
There were many snakes near Nyare village. The biggest was Lego. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, Apiyo, Ajoh and Atieno went to fetch firewood. Grandmother said, “Be careful of Lego. Fetch firewood only.” Ajoh did not pay attention.
The girls packed some food, ropes and a sharp machete. Apiyo said, “I am the oldest, so you must listen to me.”
They talked and laughed as they walked. Suddenly, Apiyo said, “Be quiet. We are near where Lego lives.”
Atieno said, “These are Lego's golden teeth. Let us take them.” Apiyo reminded them, “Remember what grandmother told us. We must fetch only firewood.”
“Grandmother does not know anything. I will take the golden teeth,” saidAjoh. Apiyo and Atieno were not happy.
Lego came looking for his golden teeth. They were not there. Lego thought, “The one who took my teeth will know who I am!”
On their way home, the girls heard, “Hzzzzzzzz!” Lego was there with his mouth wide open, ready to swallow.
Lego asked, “Who took my golden teeth?” No one answered. Lego said, “The innocent girl will sing well. The thief will not.”
Apiyo sang: It's not me! It's not me who took the teeth! The one who took is near!Atieno also sang well.
Ajoh sang badly and the words did not come out. Lego shouted, “Sing like the others.” Lego knew that Ajoh took his golden teeth.
Lego swallowed Ajoh. Her sisters ran home to say what happened. The girls' grandmother said sadly, “I warned them, if only Ajohhad listened.”
Ball.
My ball.
My red ball.
My big red ball.
I kick.
I kick my ball.
I kick my redball.
I kick my redball hard!
Where?
Where is my ball?
Where is my ballnow?
Where is my redball now?
It is up.
It is high up.
It is high up inthe sky.
It is high up inthe sky. It is over the moon. It is gone!
This is my family. My uncle, my cousin, my mother, my two sisters (who always dress the same), my brother, and me!
This is my family on the bus going to see animals. On the bus was my aunty, my mother, my brother, my two sisters (who always dress the same), and me!
We saw animals from the bus.
We saw a giraffe.
We saw a springbok.
We saw a lion.
We saw an elephant.We laughed and laughed at the elephant, because...
...that elephant pooped in a tree!
Come back, cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back, cat! That’s way too high.
Come back, cat! Don’t go outside.
Come back, cat! That’s not yours.
Come back, cat. What have you got?
Come back, cat.  That’s not your friend!
Hello, cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It’s nap time now.
Cat?
Lerato na Khanyisa va ya elayiburari ya le kusuhi loko xikolo xi huma. Va ya eku tsaleni ka ntirhokaya wa vona.“Xana u endla yini namuntlha?” ku vutisa Khanyisa.“Ndzi lava ku lavisisa hi Siku ra Vavasati. Ndza tshembha i matimu yo lolohisa,” ku hlamula Lerato.
“Xana u tiyisile? A ya lolohisi!” ku vula Khanyisa.A ya emahlweni, “Mudyondzisi wa hina a hi nyikile asayinimente kotara leyi nga hundza. Na mina a ndzi ehleketa leswaku ya ta lolohisa. Tana ndzi ku byela leswi ndzi swi dyondzeke hi Siku ra Vavasati!”“Ndzi yingiserile!” ku hlamula Lerato.
“Malembe lama nga hundza ya va 1950, hi minkarhi ya ku sungula ka xihlawuhlawu,” ku sungula Khanyisa.“Mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu a wu lava leswaku vanhu vantima hinkwavo va khoma ‘mapasi’ kumbe buku yo titivisa.”“Mfumo wa xikoloni a wu sungurile sisitimi ya mapasi. Vantima a va nga fambafambi va tshunxekile.”
“Ku sukela hi 1912, vavasati a va ri na nsindziso hikokwalaho ka sisitimi ya mapasi eAfrika Dzonga.Hi 1913, ntlawa wa vavasati lowu a wu rhangeriwile hi Charlotte Maxeke, va hisile mapasi ya vona emahlweni ka tihofisi ta ka masipala. Va lwile na maphorisa!”
“Ku suka eka mfumo wa xikoloni ku ya eka mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu, swilo swi suke eka xiyimo xo tika kutani xi nyanya swinene,” ku vula Khanyisa.“Hatla u hlamusela leswaku ku humelele yini hi ti 9 Mhawuri 1956?” ku vula Lerato va ri karhi va fika elayiburari.“U fanele ku khensa vutivi bya mina bya matimu!” ku vula Khanyisa.
Elayiburari, va tshamile etafuleni ra le khoneni. Khanyisa a ya emahlweni a hlevetela.“Hi va 1950, ku tika ka xihlawuhlawu a ku endla vutomi byi tikela vanhu vantima.Vutomi a byi tika ngopfu-ngopfu eka vavasati va vantima. Kutani hi sindzisa!” ku vula Khanyisa, a tlakuserile rito ehenhla.
“Hi 1956, vavasati va Afrika Dzonga va kunguhatile machi leyikulu ya ku lwisana na nawu lowuntshwa wa mapasi lowu sunguriweke.Machi lowu a wu kunguhatiwile hiti 9 ta Mhawuri.Vavasati va vantima na valungu ku suka etikweni hinkwaro va yile ePitori eUnion Buildings va yela Machi ya Vavasati.”
“A kuri siku ro saseka! Kwalomu ka 20 000 wa vavasati va nghenerile machi.Lava a va rhangerile machi lowu a kuri Lillian Ngoyi, Sophia Williams, Helen Joseph, Rahima Moosa, na Bertha Gxowa. Un’wana na wun’wana a tiyingiserile na ku tiyimisela.“Va yisile magidigidi ya mapapila ya swivilelo eka mfumo. Mapapila lawa a ya kanetanaka na nawu wa mapasi.”
“Ku humelerile yini endzhaku ka swona?” ku vutisa Lerato.“Va yimile va rindza hulobyenkulu. Va yimile va miyerile ku ringana timinete ta30, va rindzile.Makumembirhi wa magidi wa vavasati, a swi tikile! A nga tanga ku tata hlangana na vona,” ku hlamula Khanyisa.“Matoya lawa!” ku hlamula Lerato.“Kutani, vavasati va sungurile ku yimbelela,” ku vula Khanyisa.
“Va ri karhi va yimile swin’we, vavasati va vona matimba ya marito ya vona, na matimba ya ku miyela ka vona,” ku hlamusela Khanyisa.“Va yimbelerile va ku,’ Wathinta abafazi, Wathint’imbokodo, Uzakufa!’‘Loko u faya wansati, swa fana na loko u faya tamba, u ta pyanyiwa!”
“Machi wa Vavasati i nsindziso wa nkoka eka matimu ya hina.Endzhaku ka ntshunxeko, ti9 ta Mhawuri ti vile holideyi ya mani na mani, siku leri hi hloniphaka vavasati no tlangela mintirho ya vona eka rixaka.Hi nga tlangela leswaku vavasati va na malunghelo ku tlula ekusunguleni,” ku heta Khanyisa.
Lerato a ku, “Mayana, u fanele u kumile A eka asayinimente yeleyo?!”“Ina, a ndzi hlohleteriwa hi vavasati lavo tala vo hlamarisa eka matimu ya hina. Ku tinyiketa ka vona na ku humelela ka vona swa hlohletela!” ku hlamula Khanyisa.A engetela,” Lerato, mina na wena hi nga fana na vavasati lava nkarhi lowu taka!”
If I were a bank manager,  I would be giving money to everybody.
If I were a vehicle,  I would transport people free of charge.
If I were a hunter,  I would hunt for animals which have no hair.
If I were a rat,  I would grow fat and chase the cat.
If I were a baby,  I would cry for only expensive things.
If I were a cat,  I would be eating rats to grow fatter.
If I were a hen,  I would be laying golden eggs for people.
If I were a beggar,  I would not accept coins.
If I were a doctor,  I would treat people with slaps!
If I were a priest,  I would be taking all people to heaven.
If I were a mosquito,  I would be sleeping under a mosquito net.
My sister's name is Resego. She is three years older than me.
Resego helps me to put on my school uniform in the morning.She walks with me to school every day.
But today, my big sister is not feeling well. Resego is sick!What am I going to do without her?
On the way to school, I meet Tumi and we walk together.This makes me feel a little better.
At school, my teacher sings me a song.This makes me feel happy.
At play time, Boipelo plays with me. I am feeling much happier.
It's time to go home.I had a good day.
And I will feel happiest when I tell my big sister all about today!
My mother planted.She planted a small garden.She planted a small garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a small garden.  He planted a small garden of flowers.
My mother weeded in both gardens.
My father watered in both gardens.
My parents and I worked in the small gardens.My sister and I  harvested the flowers and peas.
The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.
Refiloe shooed her chickens out of the tent. "Run away you silly things." she said, "I don't want you to be eaten at Palesa's wedding!"
Refiloe's mother was very proud of her house, and wanted it to be perfect for the wedding. She cleaned and washed and scrubbed and scoured and polished everything in sight. When she had finished, there was not a single speck of dust anywhere. The chickens poked their heads inside the front door. "Out!" shouted Refiloe's mother, "out you scruffy things with your dirty feet and beaks!"
Refiloe put the first chicken into the bucket of water. It clucked at the top of its voice and flapped its wings like crazy. "Hold still you silly thing," Refiloe shouted, "this won't take long!" When Refiloe wiped the chicken's nose and eyes it suddenly went limp and flopped over the side of the bucket.
"This is no time to sleep," said Refiloe. She gave it a good shake to get all the water out. "If you are not going to wake up now, I'll have to put you somewhere to dry nicely," she said. She laid the chicken out on the grass to dry. The chicken lay completely still.
Refiloe washed each and every one of her chickens. Each and every one of them went limp and floppy before she was finished with it. She put all those eight chickens in a row on the grass to dry. Not one of them moved a single feather. "I'll leave them to sleep a little," Refiloe thought to herself, and off she went to check on the moroho.
Mme Ngwe and Mme Pedi were Refiloe's aunts. They did not like each other at all. The aunts had been preparing for months for Palesa's wedding, but they would not even think about riding together in the same taxi.
Mme Ngwe spotted Refiloe's chickens laid out to dry. "What a nice little snack for me to take home!" she said to herself. She took off her chale and carefully wrapped all those chickens up in it. Not a single chicken moved. "Perfect!" she smiled, "now I shall put them somewhere where Mme Pedi will not ever find them," and she put the bundle around the corner among the pumpkin vines.
The next day the sun rose in good time for the wedding. Refiloe was up first and went to see her chickens. She saw that they were no longer lying on the grass. "They must be nicely dry by now. I'm sure they have gone to look for their breakfast," she said.
It was only when the groom's father was halfway through his speech that things started to change on that roof.
The first chicken spread its wings and flew onto Mme Ngwe's bosom. Mme Pedi next to her started giggling. Another chicken flew up onto Mme Ngwe's new duku. The people at the next table tried not to laugh. The lady next to Mme Ngwe put her head down onto the table, "Ai, aai, aaaaii, he, he, heeeeeeee!" she cackled. All the other chickens decided to join the first two. You couldn't see Mme Ngwe for all those chickens!
The guests screamed with laughter. The men had to hold onto their bellies. The women rolled around in their chairs. The boys and girls were hanging onto each other. The grandmothers could hardly breathe for laughing. The grandfathers stamped their walking sticks. Then the two aunts looked at each other and started giggling. Mme Pedi opened her mouth wide with laughter. Mme Ngwe threw back her head and laughed until all her chins shook. Refiloe couldn't believe it!
All the guests agreed that it was the best wedding entertainment ever known in Malealea. "Oh you are so lucky!" Refiloe said to her chickens as she put them into their coop for the night, "Mme says that she will never put you in the supper pot." "But look how dirty you are again," she told them, "I think I'll have to give you another wash tomorrow!"
There are many ways to travel. Which shall I choose?
Should I use a plane?
Planes fly very high. I am afraid of flying!
Perhaps I should use a helicopter?
But helicopters and planes are the same!
Should I perhaps use a train?
But the train station is very far.
Or,  perhaps,  I should use a bus?
Our village has only one bus!
Perhaps I shall use a lorry to travel.
But lorries are used for carrying heavy luggage.
Should I use a bicycle to travel?
But will my father give me his bicycle?
Perhaps I will try to use a boat?
But I do not trust boats very much!
Aah! I know what I shall use! I shall use a tractor to travel.
"I have a very big problem," cried Chief Short and Round.
"I have lost my spring horn," said Chief Short and Round.
"I will find your spring horn," said Little Jojo. "I will look at Tata Rectangle's house."
Little Jojo and Tata Rectangle looked everywhere but they could not find the spring horn.
"Go and see if Mama Triangle has the spring horn," said Tata Rectangle.
Little Jojo stopped at his house to pour a glass of cold water.
Jojo visited Dudu Diamond and asked if she would go with him.
"It’s not far but I will pack some food to take with," said Dudu.
Dudu and Jojo stopped to eat and rest at the bottom of the triangle mountain.
When they were half way up the mountain, they saw a strange spider web.
Jojo and Dudu arrived at Mama Triangle’s house.
"The chief did not leave his spring horn here," said Mama Triangle.
Mama Triangle knew where they could find the spring horn.
It was evening when they arrived at Chief Short and Round’s house.
Mama Triangle pointed at the chief. "You are wearing your spring horn on your head."
Chief Short and Round gave Little Jojo the spring horn to blow.  They were happy.
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
This is Natabo.She has six brothers.
Her parents giveher a small pot. She loves it.
One day herbrothers break the pot.
Natabo cannotfind her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away.She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Pleasecome down," theyask.
Her brotherssing, "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
﻿I lost my bat.    I cant find it anywhere.
I searched behind the door.    It's not there.
I checked on the shelf.   couldn't find it there.
﻿Searched under the cot.    It's not there either.
﻿checked in the box.     There is no trace of it.
Searched the whole loft.     couldn't find it there too.
﻿I searched for it everywhere.     couldn't find it anywhere.      There, It's in my sister's hand.
There once lived a man and his wife in a village,  near a magic lake. The man and his wife were good people but they had a problem,  they could not have any children.
One day they decided to go to the magic lake,  and ask the guardian of the lake for a child. "My wife cannot have children,  though we have tried for many years nothing come of it" said the man. "We came to ask you if you would give us a child to care for" the man continued to speak.
"And why should I give you a child when you have brought me no offering" the Guardian spoke. The man took a beautiful heart-shaped locket from his pocket,  it was his most precious possession. "My offering is my mother's locket" said the man. Then the Guardian decided to give them a child,  whom she pulled from beneath the lake.
The child looked sweet as she slept,  and she was very beautiful,  "be WARNED,  my child is precious to me,  should you ever mistreat her in any way,  you will lose her forever" said the Guardian. The man and his wife were happy and decided to name the child Precious.
Many years passed and both the Man and his Wife very happy,  Precious was also happy and had grown into a beautiful woman,  the man his wife took great care of her. Every man in the village knew about Precious' beauty,  so every day her father would see many man who wanted her hand in marriage,  but he refused all of them.
One day a young-man came with more cows than the man and his wife could count,  he asked for Precious' hand,  the father was persuaded by greed,  so he agreed that the young man should marry Precious. Precious and the young man were married one month later and then they moved to another village. But before they left the man told the Young-man about the guardians warning,  but the Young-man simply laughed.
The Young-Man's family worked Precious like a slave,  she had to work day and knight,  sometimes they would make her cook for them but she would not be allowed to eat the food she cooked,  she went to sleep hungry. All her beautiful clothes were given to her sister's in-law. She had to wear old torn clothes and all her beautiful hair was cut short. She was very sad.
One day Precious' started to cry,  her tears were so full of sadness that they started to fill her husband's home,  they flooded the whole farm and then the whole village.
Her tears flooded many villages until they reached the magic lake. The Guardian saw that the tears were that of her daughter Precious,  so she followed the river of tears and took her daughter home to the magic lake.
The Young-man and his family all perished from the flood. The man and his wife lost all of their possessions in the flood,  including all the cows that he received for Precious' hand-in marriage,  they were now poor and had lost their only child because of greed. They went to the magic lake to ask for help but when they arrived at the lake,  the Guardian of the lake swallowed them up with the lake before they could speak.
One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi’s cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”Her stomach growled when the baby’s powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life.
One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter.What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.
Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong.Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed.She taught them to sing: “Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers.He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, “You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back.”Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi’s broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers.How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father’s face.
On her sixth birthday she went to school. “You must choose an English name,” said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. “Why do I need a new name?” she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: “Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna.” What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn’t mess with.When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, “You have a big job, my blessing.”At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.
Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride.Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, “You must apply, my clever friend.” “What is the prize?” asked Albertina, growing curious.“A scholarship to high school!” said Betty. “You must apply. You’ll win it, for sure.”
Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.The test began. Albertina’s fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. “Well done, Albertina!” said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. “Well done to Albertina for full marks,” he said, “but you are too old. The scholarship goes to…”Albertina tried not to cry. “That’s unfair,” shouted Betty, hopping with fury. “That wasn’t in the rules!” How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home.The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn’t like the story one bit either.
Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached.She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse’s silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground.
School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty’s back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons.In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? “But nuns earn no salary,” said Father Bernard. “Perhaps you should become a nurse? You’ll be paid while you study.”
Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse.Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.
Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina’s eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children.Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men’s Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina’s long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation.Max had his mother’s black button eyes and his father’s round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. “How rude you are!” she said, “trampling mud inside my home.”In the morning Albertina’s favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover.She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police.
She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, “Wathint’ abafazi; wathint’ imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!”Many hard years followed after Walter’s arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
In the faraway veld in Ncwadi, there was a frog who lived in the grass with her three children.
Every day, Mummy Frog went out to look for food for her family. Mummy Frog always warned her children, "Do not go outside while I am away!"
But the littlest frog wanted to know where her mother went to find food.One day, while Mummy Frog was away, Little Frog went out into the world.
Little Frog met a cow. She asked, "What do you eat?" The cow mooed, "I eat hay and grass.""Where can I find them?" asked Little Frog. "Go down the road," replied the cow.
Little Frog met a pig. She asked, "What do you eat?" The pig oinked, "I eat vegetables and mealie pap." "Where can I find them?" asked Little Frog. "Go down the road," replied the pig.
Little Frog met a cat. She asked, "What do you eat?" The cat meowed, "I eat meat.""Where can I find it?" asked Little Frog. "Go down the road," replied the cat.
Little Frog met a snake."What do you eat?" she asked."I eat frogs," hissed the snake.
Little Frog jumped up high into the air.She jumped as fast as she could, all the way home.Little Frog did not look back.
Once upon a time there was a husband and wife with children.The mother prepared food for the family each day. She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.
The father would divide the meat. He would say to the eldest child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."
Then he would say to the next child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."Each small portion became even smaller. It went like this for all the children. The youngest child got a tiny piece of meat.
The father kept the big pieces of meat for himself and his wife. The children were quiet and ate their food.
Years passed and the children grew up. The parents grew old. They became weak. The children looked after their old mother and father.
One day at meal time, the eldest child served the meat, as usual. But this time she gave only a tiny piece to her father and a tiny piece to her mother.
She said to her parents, "You ate yours, now it is our time. We are old enough."She served most of the meat to her brothers and sisters.
The father remembered what he did while his children were young. Mother and father agreed that it was not the right thing to do.They asked for forgiveness. The children promised that they would not repeat this mistake with their own children.
A story is told of a man who lived in a far away village with his son. His name was Syonzola and he was a very mischievous man. People in the village didn't like him very much because he liked to lie a lot.
At night, Syonzola would wait until everyone was asleep. He would stand outside and start shouting, "Help! Help!  I'm being attacked. Please, someone help me!"
The people would come running to help him with spears in their hands. "Hahahahahaha!" Syonzola would laugh until his stomach was sore when he saw them.
"Are you OK? Where is the animal that was attacking you?" People would shout. "It went that way, please help," Syonzola would say to them and point at the darkness behind the trees. After searching, they would tell him to stop his lies and go to sleep.
One night his son heard him screaming and shouting for help again. His son never understood why his dad liked to fool people. But on this night his son didn't hear people opening their doors and running to help. He only heard his father screaming.
The other villagers were not in the mood to wake up because they knew Syonzola was up to his old tricks again. So they decided to sleep and wait for him to stop his loud screams.
"Help! Help me please," his son waited and waited. But this time he could sense that something was terribly wrong. Now he was hearing something else that sounded scary and his father's cries were much louder than normal.
So the boy ran out and saw that a vicious animal was attacking his father. And he was brave and weaved his fire stick at the animal and the animal ran away from the fire.
The animal ran very fast into the darkness. Syonzola was so proud to see how brave his son was. He was very grateful to his son for saving him from the vicious animal that night.
From that day Syonzola never told a lie again and was forever grateful to his son for saving his life. Instead of screaming, "Help! Help!" Syonzola now told everyone in the village about his brave son.
One special Friday Yusuf ’s father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woollen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf ’s eyes brighten when Papa says, “Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you.”
A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer’s Corner.Gulls circle the sky. “Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” they cry. “What will you bring back for Yusuf?”Papa rings his bell. “Wait and see what it will be!”
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf ’s grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa’s arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple.Papa sings as he works: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf ’s father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls. “What will you do to help the turtles?”Papa said, “We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one.”
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. Mother wants a new dress.“Don’t be silly,” says Ouma. “You’ll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There’s not so many fish left in the sea.”Yusuf holds Ouma’s hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. “What is for supper?”
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls.“There’s enough sea for everybody,” said Yusuf ’s father. He showed them the fishing licence that had been Oupa Salie’s. “Waves for all. Water for free.”
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What will Yusuf ’s father bring from the ocean?”
Yusuf’s father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf’s father untangles the nets, singing to the shark: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa’s finger.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What did you bring back for Yusuf?”As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. “A lucky shark tooth for my boy.”At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
