Feet
Legs
Knees
Waist
Belly
Chest
Hands
Arms
Elbows
Head
Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boywearing a beautifulshirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like that boy," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
Why is the sky blue?
It's not always blue.Is not it?
Why are the leaves green?
They are not always green.Is not it?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow.Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is the blood red?
There is iron in the blood.It makes it red.
Why is salt white?I do not know!
Why have you not done your homework?Miss, it is all because of the cat.
The cat sat on the tree.So I took a ladder to climb the tree.
But the ladder was broken. So I took a hammer.The hammer made a noise.So the baby woke up.
Mother ran out to see the baby.So the monkey came in.
The monkey ate all the food.So there was no food for us.
Father bought chicken biryani for us.So the dog followed him.
The dog ate my notebook.So I couldn't bring my homework.
So, the dog ate your homework?
Yes, Miss. But it is all because of the cat.
Sukhiya Kaka lived in a village called Bitauna. Bitauna was famous all over Rajasthan for its singers. No celebration was complete without Sukhiya Kaka's sweet songs. Today he had been invited to village Jhalaura.
Sukhiya Kaka twirled his big moustache and set off.He was singing raag Malhar....Come to me o rolling clouds...
Suddenly, he heard, dhupp dhupp dhupp dhupp!Was someone giving a beat to his song?Dinoo, the dinosuar came running towards him. Sukhiya Kaka was so happy to see him!
You don't get such a BIG listener every day!... Come to me o rolling clouds, shower me with lovely rain!Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo sang a duet and did a little jig to keep time.
The clouds just had to listen to them!Lightning flashed and the wind danced. Dark clouds came rolling in. Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo laughed with joy.
As the rain came pouring down, Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo shared a small umbrella. Then off they went to Jhalaura following the smell of yummy pakoras, singing...O thank you for the lovely rain...O..la la la.
Dear Reader,Have you ever seen a dinosaur?Do you think they would have sung songs?What do you like to do in the rain?What do you like to eat when it rains?
#6FrameStoryChallenge: A Carnival of ArtThe illustrations in this book were created as part of the #6FrameStoryChallenge, an online campaign run by Pratham Books to build a rich bank of illustrations for StoryWeaver. The essence of the #6FrameStoryChallenge was to tell a good story using just 6 illustrations.  The campaign inspired nearly 70 illustrators to donate their time and skills to India’s first open-source story-publishing platform for children. What started out as an experimental campaign soon blossomed into a carnival of art, birthing nearly 500 new illustrations.These wordless narratives cut across language barriers, opening up a world of possibilities, encouraging StoryWeaver’s growing community to dream up multiple stories around these images. The #6FrameStoryChallenge is a powerful reminder of the need for collaboration, to get closer to our mission: “A Book in Every Child’s Hand.”
Why is the baby crying?
I think she is hungry.
Why is the boy sad?
I think he is missing his father.
Why is the girl happy?
She has a new dress.
Why is the old man laughing?
He read a good joke.
Why is the lady smiling?
Her children are reading quietly.
What is this lady feeling?
I think she is feeling shy.
Chunu and Munu are walking.They reach the corn field.
Their daddy is in the field.He is sowing corn.
“Can we help you?” the girls ask.
Father looks at Chunu. Then he looks at Munu.
"Okay," Daddy says.“Come and help me.”
Chunu and Munu are happy. They water the corn.
Weeks later, the corn begins to sprout.The girls cheer and smile.
They weed the corn.It is growing so well!
A few weeks later...Chunu says, “Look at the weeds!”Munu says, “Look at the grass.”
Chunu pulls out the weeds.Munu pulls out the grass.
The corn crop is happy.
Chunu picks the cobs.Munu puts them in a basket.
The basket is full of corn!The girls carry it all the way home.
Daddy roasts the corn.Chunu and Munu eat it happily.
Chunu and Munu cheer,“The corn is yummy.Very yummy!”
In the busy city,  far away from a caring life at home,  lived a group of homeless boys. They welcomed each day just as it came. On one morning,  the boys were packing their mats after sleeping on cold pavements. To chase away the cold they lit a fire. Among the group of boys was Magozwe. He was the youngest.
When Magozwe's parents died,  he was only five years old. He went to live with his uncle. This man did not care about the child. He did not give Magozwe enough food. He made the boy do a lot of hard work.
If Magozwe complained or questioned,  his uncle beat him. When Magozwe asked if he could go to school,  his uncle beat him and said,  "You're too stupid to learn anything." After three years of this treatment Magozwe ran away from his uncle. He started living on the street.
Street life was difficult and most of the boys struggled daily just to get food. Sometimes they were arrested,  sometimes they were beaten. When they were sick,  there was no one to help. The boys survived from begging, and selling plastics and other recycling.
One day while Magozwe was looking through the dustbins,  he found an old tattered storybook. He cleaned the dirt from it and put it in his sack. Every day after that he would take out the book and look at the pictures. He did not know how to read the words.
The pictures told the story of a boy who grew up to be a pilot. Magozwe would daydream of being a pilot. Sometimes,  he imagined that he was the boy in the story.
It was cold and Magozwe was standing on the road begging. A man walked up to him. "Hello,  I'm Thomas. I work at a place where you can get something to eat," he said. Thomas pointed to a house nearby. "I hope you will go there to get some food?" he asked. Magozwe looked at the man,  and then at the house. "Maybe," he said,  and walked away.
Over the months that followed,  the homeless boys got used to seeing Thomas around. He liked to talk to people,  especially people living on the streets. Thomas listened to the stories of people's lives. He was patient and respectful. Some of the boys started going to the yellow house to get food.
Magozwe was sitting on the pavement looking at his picture book when Thomas sat down next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a pilot," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "I don't know,  I can't read," said Magozwe.
When they met,  Magozwe began to tell his own story to Thomas. It was the story of his uncle and why he ran away. Thomas didn't talk a lot,  and he didn't tell Magozwe what to do,  but he always listened carefully.
Around Magozwe's tenth birthday,  Thomas gave him a new storybook. It was a story about a village boy who grew up to be a famous soccer player. Thomas read that story to Magozwe many times,  until one day he said,  "I think it's time you went to school and learned to read. What do you think?" Thomas explained that he knew of a place where children could stay,  and go to school.
Magozwe thought about this new place,  and about going to school. What if his uncle was right and he was too stupid to learn anything? What if they beat him at this new place? He was afraid. "Maybe it is better to stay living on the street," he thought.
He shared his fears with Thomas. Over time the man reassured the boy that life could be better at the new place.
And so Magozwe moved into a house and shared the room with two other boys. There were ten children living at that house. Along with Auntie Cissy and her husband,  three dogs,  a cat,  and an old goat.
Magozwe started school and it was difficult. He had a lot to catch up. Sometimes he wanted to give up. But he thought about the pilot and the soccer player in the storybooks. Like them,  he did not give up.
Magozwe was sitting in the yard at the house where he stayed,  reading a storybook from school. Thomas came up and sat next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a teacher," replied Magozwe. "What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "His name is Magozwe," said Magozwe with a smile.
Chicken and Millipede were friends. But they were always competing. One day, they decided to play football to see who was the best player.
They went to the football field and started their game. Chicken was fast, but Millipede was faster. Chicken kicked far, but Millipede kicked further. Chicken started to feel angry.
They decided to play a penalty shoot-out. First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede dribbled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she lost. She was a very bad loser. Millipede started laughing because his friend was making such a fuss.
Chicken was so angry that she opened her beak wide and swallowed Millipede.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Mother Millipede asked, "Have you seen my child?" Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. "Help me mom!" cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked around and listened carefully. The voice came from inside the chicken.
Mother Millipede shouted, "Use your special power my child!" Millipedes can make a bad smell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill.
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed. And coughed. Millipede tasted disgusting!
Chicken coughed until she coughed out Millipede. Mother Millipede and her child crawled up a tree to hide.
From that time, all chickens and millipedes were enemies.
I enjoy skipping with my friend.
I enjoy writing letters on the board.
I enjoy reading picture books.
I enjoy eating fruit.
I enjoy helping at home.
I enjoy listening to my mother's stories.
I enjoy sleeping on a big bed.
I enjoy doing these things. What do you enjoy doing?
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
Sonu wore a blue shirt after his bath. Monu and Rina wore blue socks.
Oh,we are all dressed in the same colour today!Come, let us see some other colours!
Hereare Dadi's red chillies, don't touch them!
Aha,Bholu is cutting purple brinjals.
Rani Didi has sunshineyellowlemons.
Colours are fun to see. Now toeat something colourful too! Yummy! Should we eat a pink chuski?
Or a creamy white kulfi?
We can drink tangy greenjaljeera.
Or we can have sweet browndates?
But Ramu's guavas are thebest.
Green on the outside,pinkinside, with pure white salt and red chilli powder!
A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly, they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But, she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise, a dog opened the door and said, "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said, "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said, "Make the bed for  me!" Nozibele answered, "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed, or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said, "Nozibele, today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone, Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back, he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele, where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here, under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here, behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here, in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
Once upon a time there was a poor couple who had only one child, called Nonkungu. They loved her very much. When she was old enough,  her parents decided to send Nonkungu to stay with her rich Uncle Mtonyama. Nonkungu's mother made special clothes with ribbon,  buttons and beads. Then Nonkungu set off for her uncle's village.
On her journey,  Nonkungu came to a stream. She crossed the stream and met a girl wearing rags. The girl asked, "Where are you going?" Nonkungu replied, "I'm going to visit my Uncle Mtonyama." "Well,  Mtonyama is my uncle,  too! I am also on my way to visit him," said the girl. They set off together. After a while, the girl said to Nonkungu,  "Your clothes are lovely. Please let me try them on."
Nonkungu took off her clothes and gave them to the girl. When the girl took off her rags,  Nonkungu saw that she had a tail! Nonkungu was afraid. She realised that the girl was really an imbulu. They walked a little further,  and then Nonkungu asked,  "Please give me back my clothes and beads."
The imbulu answered,  "Let me wear them until we get to the next tree." She pointed to a tree on a hill nearby. When they reached the tree, Nonkungu asked, "Please give me back my clothes and beads." The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that field." She pointed to a field on the next hill.
At last they reached the field. Again Nonkungu asked the imbulu,  "Please give me back my clothes and my beads." The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that hut where the women are sitting." She pointed to a hut in the distance. But when they finally got near to the hut, the imbulu pushed Nonkungu back and ran ahead.
The imbulu said to the women at the hut, "Look at this girl wearing rags. She has been following me all day. I wish she would go away." The women turned to look at Nonkungu. She was so frightened that she ran and hid in the kraal. The imbulu went to Uncle Mtonyama's hut.
Mtonyama and his family welcomed the imbulu, who said she was their niece. Poor Nonkungu continued to hide away. She sang this song: "Oh misery me,  misery me. I was sent to stay with my Uncle Mtonyama. On the way I met an imbulu. She took my skirt and my beads. Oh misery me,  misery me."
One day,  Mtonyama's eldest son was walking in the field and heard the sad song. He didn't know who was singing,  but when he got home,  he told his father the words. Mtonyama went into the fields. He heard the song,  and looked until he found Nonkungu.
Nonkungu told her uncle everything that  had happened. Mtonyama took her back to the village and hid her in a hut. He knew what he was going to do to catch the imbulu. Mtonyama had heard that an imbulu's tail loves milk and that it can't go past milk without drinking some. So he told his men to dig a hole and fill it with sour milk.
Then Mtonyama called all the girls of the village to take part in a jumping competition. The imbulu was worried. She did not want to jump over the hole, she knew that her tail would be thirsty for the sour milk. So she went into a hut and tied her tail to her body as tightly as she could. Then she took her place with the other girls.
One girl after another jumped over the hole with the sour milk. At last it was the imbulu's turn. She tried to jump high over the hole,  but her tail broke loose. The imbulu's tail pulled her down,  down,  down into the sour milk.
As the imbulu struggled in the milk,  they quickly filled the hole with sand and buried her. That was the end of the imbulu. Nonkungu stayed happily with her uncle for a long,  long time.
READY...                 SET...                              GO!
I run
I swim
I cycle
I skate
I fly kites
When we play, we useForce: A push or pull that helps us go fast, slow, stop and even change shape.
Friction: When one surface tries to move across another and slows things down.
Energy: Our ability to do work and move.
One day,  a goat went out in the bush,  and wandered around happily. But then she got lost!
Suddenly,  she met a wolf! The wolf came up to her,  and said,  "I am very hungry."
The goat said,  "Mr Wolf,  I know you want to eat me. But I would like to die happy!"
The wolf asked the goat,  "What do you mean? Die happy? How?"
The goat answered,  "If I have to die,  I would like to die dancing!"
Then the wolf took his guitar. He sat down and started playing it.
The goat started dancing,  though she was still a little bit worried.
There were dogs nearby. They came to see what was happening.
The wolf was afraid of dogs. So,  he turned and ran away!
The goat kept on dancing,  because now she was free from the wolf!
Long, long ago, Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind were fighting.
The trouble was that Sun wanted to shine the whole day. Moon wanted to shine her light every day. Rain wanted to rain every day, and Wind wanted to blow every day. They didn't want to give each other a chance.
They decided to sit together and talk about it. Sun asked Moon, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Moon answered, "I shine at night so that the animals can hunt."
Moon asked Rain, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Rain answered, "I give the earth water so that the trees and plants can grow well. I give water for animals to drink."
Rain asked Wind, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Wind answered, "I sweep the earth clean. I scatter the rain over the whole earth."
Wind asked Sun, "What do you do that helps the earth?" Sun answered, "I give the earth light and warmth, so that animals and plants can live."
Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind listened carefully to each other.
Then Sun said, "It is true that each of us helps the earth in our own special way." "Yes", said Moon, "Not one of us is better than the others." "We can work together," said Rain. Wind said, "Then let us share the days." They all agreed.
And that is why you sometimes see the moon when the sun is shining. And sometimes you feel the wind when it is raining. Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind work very well together. They understand each other.
Do you like the sun, moon, the rain or the wind? Draw the one you like best.
Rabbit was sleeping under an apple tree. An apple fell down from a branch.
A voice said, "Run Rabbit run!" She woke up quickly and ran away with great speed.
She met Chicken. "Why are you running?" asked Chicken. Rabbit replied, "I don't know. I just heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Chicken was frightened. She started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They met Dog. Dog asked, "Why are you running?" Chicken said, "I don't know. I just heard what Rabbit said, and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Dog was surprised about what she heard. She started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
They met Horse. Horse asked Dog, "Why are you running?" Dog said, "I don't know. I just heard what Chicken said, and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Horse started to run with the others.
They met Donkey. Donkey asked, "Why are you running?" Horse replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Dog said, and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
So Donkey starts running too.
They met Cow. Cow asked, "Why are you running?" Donkey replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Horse said, and she doesn't know. She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit  said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cow was worried and starte to run as well.
They met Cat. Cat asked, "Why are you running?" Cow replied, "I don't know. I just heard what Donkey said, and he doesn't know. He heard what Horse said and she doesn't know. She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know. He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know. She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cat started running with the other animals.
Then they met the boy riding the bicycle and he asked, "Why are you running?'' And the animals replied, "We don't know. We heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know. She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
The boy laughed and said, "An apple fell off the tree because of the wind. I'm the one who said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
I like to read.
Who can I read to?Let me check one by one.
My sister is sleeping.
Who is free?
My mother and grandmother are cooking.
Who can I read to?What my father and grandfather are doing?
They are repairing car.
Idea!I can read to myself.
One day my Brother and I were walking near the  road.
A big truck was driving down the mountain.
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Namu and her brother are ready for school.
Namu carries her brother on her bicycle.
Their friends cheer for them as they ride into school.
While they are in the classroom,  a monkey arrives outside. The monkey rides away on Namu's bicycle!
The children chase the monkey.
The monkey leaves the bicycle under a tree.
The monkey swims to an island in the middle of the lake. He climbs high into a tree.
The monkey waves goodbye! The children wave back. Namu has her bicycle again.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
Every time I take a warm shower, water feels cold on my body. Who does this ? It's the wind, of course !
The milk in my cup is very hot. But when it reaches my throat, it is cold.Who did that ? Of course, it is the air around us !
There is a curtain behind the window and the curtain is moving.The wind is brushing against my face.Who does that ?  Wind, of course !
I can see the clouds in the sky and they are moving towards me.I can hear the thunder and see the lightning in the sky.Who does that ?  Wind, of course !
Branches of tree are bending. Leaves are moving.Flowers are dropping from the plants to the ground.Who does this ?  Wind, of course !
I am playing outside the house but I smell something that's sweet.My mother is making sweets.Why do I get that smell ? Because of the wind, of course !
There was a glass on the window sill, it fell down all of a sudden.The glass broke into hundred pieces.I swear, I didn't break it.Because of the wind, it fell down and broke !
I can hear the sound of a train coming.Chuku....buku.....I can't see the train but I can hear it coming.Why because of the wind I can hear the sound.
You can't see it, it won't talk.
I  wonder if  there's another me somewhere in the  world. THOUGHTS  FOR  YOUR  CHILD What do you think – is there another animal just like this one, somewhere in the world? There are five trees in this picture. If you take away the one tree on one side, how many trees are left on the other side?
Who looks  the same. THINK ABOUT THE FOLLOWINGWhen you look in a mirror, or a reflective surface like this  water, you see a reflection of your image. An image that has one side that looks like the reflection  of the other side is said to be symmetric. Most people's faces are very close to being symmetric. Do you see some things in your room that are symmetric?
And  talks  the  same. ACTIVITIESThis animal is listening to its echo across a canyon.  Have you ever been someplace where you can hear  an echo? Does your echo sound exactly like you, or is it different somehow?
who even has curls just like mine. ACTIVITIESThe hippo and the mouse both have a tail that is  curled, but they are certainly not the same as our friend. Describe some ways that those two animals are  different from our friend. Pick someone you know, and describe some ways that you are similar to them and different from them.
Someone with eyes and ears like mine. ACTIVITIESThis animal has 3 eyelashes on each side. How many eyelashes is that all together?
Who even laughs just like me. MORE ACTIVITIES TO DOCan you make sounds like some of the animals?  Can you neigh like a horse?Oink like a pig?Meow like a cat, or bray like a donkey?
Who can do what I can do.....THINGS YOUR CHILD DOESThey are so happy running along together. Do you feel happy when you are running freely in a big open  space like that? Do you prefer to run with someone or by yourself? They are running by some rocks. How many rocks are there? There are two big rocks near the path. If you take the big rocks away, how many rocks are left?
...and can't do what I can't do.DIFFICULT THINGS TO DOWhy are the animals having trouble peeling a banana?  Can you peel a banana easily? Are there things, such as fruit or packages, that you  have trouble opening?
I've looked and looked everywhere to find another  me. I went down to the park and looked behind the  trees. THINGS THAT YOUR CHILD WONDERS ABOUTWhat animal did he see when he looked behind the tree? Why was it another animal just like him? Is that what he was looking for?
I looked up and down, left and right and all around.WHAT DOES YOUR CHILD THINK?That first picture is just silly. How would that animal  ever climb to the top of a tree? Do you think the bird is surprised to see it there?
I looked at every animal I found.CAN YOUR CHILD ADD NUMBERS?There are three animals on one side of the pond and  one more on the other side.  If you put them all together, how many animals are there at the pond? Similarly, if you remove the one animal on one side of the pond from the group of four animals that are  at the pond, how many animals are left?The two facts – that 3 + 1 = 4 and 4  – 1 =  3 – are tied together and are called a math fact family.
I couldn't find anywhere, anybody who looked just like me.WHAT DOES YOUR CHILD THINK?Do you think his shadow temporarily fooled him into thinking that there was another animal just like him?Does your shadow look like you? Have you ever seen someone's shadow and thought  that the shadow was really a person?
There's only one me in the world! I am very special you see.DIFFERENCES IN ANIMALSHow many animals can you count in this picture?Describe some of the ways that each one of them is different from our friend.
But I am not the only special one. There is only one of you too!EACH PERSON IS UNIQUEDo you know someone who is very similar to you? Perhaps they are the same age or the same height,  or perhaps their hair is similar to yours.  Despite the similarities, they are probably not exactly the same as you.
"Ammachi! Ammachi! Could we makecoconut barfi today?" Sooraj asked his grandmother."PLEEEEEAASE?"
"Hee hee hee! Only if you help me make it, eh?" replied Ammachi."YAY!"
"Ready?" shouted Sooraj."Ready!" said Ammachi.
"We’ll only pick the ripe ones, okay?                             The ones that are brown all over...                                Watch out! Here they come!"                        WHOOOSH... WHUMP!
"Now to get the husk off…"                                        POTCH! CRAANKK!
Sooraj’sstomach went: "GRRRRRR!" Ammachigiggled.
"Then we  crACK                                             the shell… like THIS!"                                                                                                          KHATAK!
"And grrrrrraaaaate thefrrrrrrrruuuit!"
"Toss it into the pan with all theother ingredients…" "It smells SO good, Ammachi!"
"Then we pour it all out on to atray… Wait for it to cool, baba!"
"Now cut it into                         neat little slices…"                                            SQUEAK                                            SQUEAK
"YIPPEE! Our coconut barfi is ready to be eaten!"                                                                     "YUM YUM YUM!"
Ammachi's barfi was made using SIMPLE MACHINES!  Simplemachines make it easier to do work. There are six kinds of simple machines: 1. Inclinedplane 2. Lever 3. Wheeland Axle
4. Wedge 5. Pulley 6. ScrewCan youidentify the simple machines that Sooraj and Ammachi used in the process ofmaking coconut barfi?
Malela village was surrounded by hills. Many snakes lived in the forest on those hills. The biggest snake was called python by the villagers. Python scared many people. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, three sisters, Mutale, Mutinta and Mabvuto went to the forest to fetch firewood. The girls' grandmother warned, "Beware of Python the big snake. Do not take anything from the forest except the wood."  Only Ajoh did not pay attention to her grandmother.
The girls packed milk, bananas, sweet potatoes and water. They took ropes for tying firewood and a sharp dagga for chopping the wood. Then they left for the forest.
On the way, the sisters chatted and laughed. Suddenly,  Mutale, the eldest of them, said, "Be quiet. We are coming to where Unyalego the snake lives."
Mabvuto called to the others, "Look, here are Python's golden teeth. Let us take them."  Mutale reminded them, "Don't forget grandmother's warning. We must not take anything from the forest except firewood."
Mutinta said, "I don't trust grandmother. She said that to stop us having what we want. I want the golden teeth." Her sisters were worried, but Mutinta did not care.
At that moment Python came looking for his golden teeth. He was furious when he could not find the teeth. Then python heard the girls chatting and laughing. He hid under a rock next to the road where the girls would pass on their way back.
The sisters were going home carrying their firewood. Suddenly, they heard, "Hssssss!" There was Python with his mouth wide open, ready to bite. The girls were terrified.
Python asked the girls, "Who took my golden teeth?" No one answered. Python decided to test the girls. "Whoever is innocent,  will be able to sing well. She will go home with her wood. But the guilty one will sing badly. And I will eat her!"
Mutale started to sing with a clear voice, "It was not me,  it was not me who took the teeth. The one who took is still behind." Then Mabvuto sang the song. She also sang well.
Lastly, it was Mutinta's turn. She was scared. She started singing. It  sounded terrible and the words were wrong. Python shouted, "Can't you sing properly like the others?" Python knew that Mutinta took his golden teeth.
Python opened his huge jaws and swallowed Mutinta. Her sisters ran back to the village. They told everyone the story of what happened. "I warned her, if only she had listened," the girls' grandmother said sadly.
'Wov! What a lovely raincoat!' Mannu danced happily holding the shining red raincoat that his parents had bought for him.'Mamma, may I wear the raincoat now?' Manu asked his mother.Mamma said, 'No, my child. You can wear it when it rains. It should start raining soon. But as of now I don't see any signs of the rain.'
But, Monday was a bright sunny day, full of golden sunshine.Mannu looked out of the window every now and then and asked his mother,'Mamma, will it rain today?'Mamma  peeped out of the window and said, ' I don't think it will rain today. You cannot wear the raincoat today. People will laugh at you, if you do.'
On Tuesday also Mannu kept looking at the sky. And the raincoat was kept right next to him, ready to be used. But the sky was a nice blue and as bright as it was on Monday.Mannu was disappointed,'Mamma, when will I be able to use the raincoat?''There is just a single cloud in the sky today, and that too a white one. I don't think you will get a chance to wear the raincoat today.'Mamma said.
Wednesday again was a very hot sunny day.Mannu was getting worried, 'Mamma, why is it not raining yet?'He tried to put the raincoat on at home. But had to immediately take it off because he felt too hot in it.Mamma, in her eagerness to comfort him said, 'I think it will rain soon, probably by afternoon.'
On Thursday, there was the school picnic. Mannu was eager to show off the raincoat to his school buddies.'Mamma, shall I carry the raincoat to the picnic. What if it rains there?' Mannu asked.'Don't, my pet. It will not rain today. See those white clouds? And they are also so far away.' Mamma tried to comfort him.
And... at last  on Friday, the sky looked quite dark with black clouds. Mannu kept the raincoat ready at hand.'Mamma, it will rain today, right mamma?' Mannu asked excitedly. The peacock also seemed to think so and started dancing. The tortoise came out of it's hiding and looked up at the sky hoping perhaps to feel cooler after the hot summer.'I think so. Today the sky is full of black clouds.' Mamma smiled at Mannu's excitement and was happy for him.
On the Saturday morning there was a loud thunder.  And also lightening.'Mamma, it that not lightening? Now it will surely rain, right Mamma?' asked Manu.He ran out on the lawns and saw that a frog and a tortoise also had come out of their hiding.
And.. tip...tap...tip...tap... came down the raindrops!Mannu, loved the rains...raincoat or no raincoat.'Oh, it is raining; it is raining.' Thus shouting  Mannu ran out of the house and started  jumping and dancing in the rain. And he had the company of the frog who also seemed to be  waiting for the rains.
'Wait Mannu, wait.' Mamma ran after him with his raincoat in her hand. 'You forgot your raincoat!'But Mannu was very happy getting drenched in rains. The raincoat which he was holding close to himself all this time was all forgotten.
Long long ago when the earth was new, great mountains covered the world like a blanket, and tall trees spiked the sky.
In this world, there was a deep dark pool, silent and cold.
At the bottom of this pool were two snakes. One had thick strongly patterned coils, and the other was smaller and more delicate.
Then one day, there was a great storm. A flash of lightning pierced right to the bottom of the pool. The waters parted for a moment. The snakes saw the earth above, full of colours and shapes and feathered creatures. When the waters closed again, the snakes could not forget the beauty they had seen.
"We cannot stay in this dark cold pool any longer," they said to each other. "Let us go up and see the earth above." "How will we live on earth?" said the smaller snake. "Will we crawl on our bellies?"
"The birds of the air will not laugh at us for being so low," said her friend. "We will not crawl, we will walk!" Very slowly the snakes uncoiled themselves. Close together they began to swim up, up, to the light above.
And as they reached the surface of the water, a strange thing happened. The tips of their tails split into two. They grew limbs with feet and toes. From just beneath their heads grew two arms with hands and fingers.
They were no longer snakes, but Man and Woman.
"We will make our home in the hills," said Woman. "Each morning we will see the sun rise and feel it warm on our backs." "We will look after the grass and the trees," said Man. "And be friends with Bird and Beast."
"Come," said First Man. "I will," said First Woman. And they walked out together into their new world.
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie, Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can seethe huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing."There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone, I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes, 12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says."I like counting in 4s," says Duksie, "it's quicker." "I'm goingto count in 3s, just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look, there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did youpack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asksthe children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side, to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see, how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself, "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen andget a surprise forthe children!"
Back at the farm, Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them, "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what shemight bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of apples falls onto the table. "See, I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children, "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. They count: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 1 apple left over. Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next, they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted. "Yay!" shout the children."
Nani keeps losing her glasses.“Where did I keep them?” she always asks. Without her glasses, she cannot find her glasses.
So she needs me. To be her eyes, to find her own eyes!
Sometimes her spectacles are in the bathroom. Or on her bed. Or on her head.“Nani,” I say, “they are on your head!”
“Of course! How silly of me. Thank you, Richa dear,” she says with a giggle.This time, though, I cannot find Nani’s glasses. Not yet.
I have looked everywhere. In all the usual places. On her head, in the bathroom, inside her cupboard, and on the puja shelf. I have looked under her favourite chair and on the dining table. Nothing. No glasses. Where could they be ?
I decided to be a good detective. I decided to find out what she had done all day.
“I did nothing much today. Except that Veena’s mother-in-law came, you know. And how much she gossips! We had many cups of tea. And she ate all the laddoos your mother had made,” said Nani.
Raju said, “Nani was very busy today. She wrote a letter to the Chief Minister about her pension.”
Amma said, “She spoke for a long time to your Masi. She finished knitting the sweater for Raju. And then she went for a short walk.” I now had many clues. I quickly looked around new places in the house. Aha! I have found the missing glasses!
The spectacles were wrapped in wool, kept next to her pen, under the phone, on her desk. And I found a half-eaten laddoo there as well. For Nani's next birthday, I will save money for an extra pair of glasses!Nani: Hindi word for grandmotherMasi: Hindi word for mother's sister
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
"I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf," cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
"If I do not have water, I will die," cried Little Ant. "I must go to the river I heard about."
"The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away," warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. "I will die if I don't drink some water."
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
"Help me someone. Help me please!" he called.
"Quick, climb on," said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
"I will stay here until I can thank the dove," decided Little Ant. "I will wait until she comes back to drink."
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
"There is a big white dove that comes here to drink," said one boy.
"I cannot let the boys kill White Dove," thought Little Ant. "But I am so tiny, what can I do?"
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
Little Ant had an idea.
Little Ant jumped onto one boy's foot. He bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. "Ouch!" he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Mother, Father and Laraba are talking about how to stay healthy.
Laraba asked at school, "Why must we wash our hands?"
Teacher said, "Our hands have germs on them, but you can't see germs."
"Germs are very tiny. We need a microscope to see them."
Laraba looked through the microscope.She saw the germs from her hand.
"Viruses and bacteria are types of germs.Germs can make us sick."
"Washing hands stops viruses and bacteria from spreading," said Teacher.
Father is making a tool for washing hands.
Laraba asks, "How does this tool work?"
"The wooden step tilts the container, and water flows out."
"Wash with soap and water. Slowly count to 20 while you wash."
"Clever Dad! Now, can you greet with your elbow?"
Once upon a time, there lived three girls in a desert village in the Kalahari. Katitu Momambo was the youngest of the three. She was small but clever and wise. The big girls went into the veld one day to gather food and wood. Katitu ran after them, but the sisters said, "Go back Katitu! You are too small to go with us! Stay at home!" Katitu followed them from a distance.
When they noticed her, they were too far away from home to send her back, so she joined them. While she was walking behind them, Katitu cut herself some wood. She made herself a bow and many arrows. The girls walked and walked and walked until the sun dropped into the Kalahari horizon. They were lost. They walked into a deserted village and found a hut in which to spend the night.
An old woman was sitting next to the hut. Little Katitu went and greeted her. "Oh?" answered the old woman, "This is the village of the Big Snake! He stays in a big hole in the cattle kraal. When people come to milk the cows, he eats them! He will go to your hut at night when you sleep and kill you there!"
"Hai, gom-gom, hai, gom-gom, where are they?" sang the Big Snake. The little clever girl answered him with a chant, "Here they are, here they are!" Then the Big Snake rushed against the hard skin at the door of the hut. Little Katitu shot an arrow through the hole in the skin. Yes, the little girl killed the Big Snake.
Then Katitu woke up the older girls. "Sister, sister, sister," she whispered, "get up, get up, get up!"
And when the girls woke up they saw a big snake lying there. "Come, we have to take him back to his hole!" shouted Katitu. They rolled him up, rolled him up, rolled him up and they set him right back in his hole. "Hurry! We have to run!" And the girls ran and ran and ran.
The girls continued to run and were very tired and thirsty. Eventually, they saw a waterhole! None of the older sisters wanted to scoop the water from the deep well. They asked Katitu to climb in as she was the smallest. "Will you help me out of the well if I climb into it?" asked Katitu. "Yes," they replied, "we will help you." Katitu went into the well and scooped water for her sisters.
Each girl drank and then walked away. They all left Katitu in the deep well and walked home. Later that evening, the elephants came to drink. One of them drank and left. Another one drank and left. The last elephant drank and swallowed Katitu with the water! A few drops of Katitu's blood sprayed onto the reeds growing at the water hole.Meanwhile, Katitu's sisters had arrived home without any food or wood. They were crying and told the family that Katitu was lost.
Katitu's father called the young men of the homestead and ordered them to find the tracks of the elephants and find Katitu. The young men hurried off. They met the first group of elephants and asked them, "Elephants, elephants, have you seen the one who swallowed our girl?" And the elephants sang: "!a plaf!a plaf! We trot lightly. We are so light, we carry nothing!" And they passed on.
The young men met up with an old elephant in the bush and asked, "Old elephant, elephant, have you seen the one who swallowed our girl?"
The old elephant sang: "!a plaf!a plaf! I trot lightly! I am so light, I carry nothing!" But now the young men heard a little voice in the belly of the elephant. "Cut him open! Go on, cut him on his left side, for I am sitting on his left side!" said the voice.
I am a big boy now.
I can climb up the steps.
But I cannot climb down again.
I can climb on a chair.
But I cannot climb down again.
I climb on to the chair, and then on the table!
But I cannot climb down again.
“Papa! Papa!” I shout. Papa laughs. “Sonu, learn to climb down!” he says.
I am afraid. But I do not cry.
Slowly, I get down from the table, and down from the chair.
At last, I have learnt to climb down too!
Once there was a very hungry crocodile.
He searched for food slowly and quietly.
POW! The crocodile strikes!
After that he is no longer hungry,  and he is happy.
Until he gets hungry again.
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
“I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf,” cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
“If I do not have water, I will die,” cried Little Ant. “I must go to the river I heard about.”
“The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away,” warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. “I will die if I don't drink some water.” So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
“Help me someone. Help me please!” he called.
“Quick, climb on,” said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
“I will stay here until I can thank the dove,” decided Little Ant. “I will wait until she comes back to drink.”
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
“There is a big white dove that comes here to drink,” said one boy. “We will have it for supper tonight.”
“I cannot let the boys kill White Dove,” thought Little Ant. “But I am so tiny, what can I do?”
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
Little Ant had an idea.
He jumped onto one boy's foot. Little Ant bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. “Ouch!” he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Ball.
My ball.
My red ball.
My big red ball.
I kick.
I kick my ball.
I kick my red ball.
I kick my red ball hard!
Where?
Where is my ball?
Where is my ball now?
Where is my red ball now?
It is up.
It is high up.
It is high up in the sky.
It is high up in the sky. It is over the moon. It is gone!
Tamara was a five year-old girl who lived with her family. Their village was near a forest that had wild animals.
Tamara was obedient to her parents. She looked after sheep and goats.
Tamara loved listening to birds singing as she took care of theanimals. As the birds sang, she put her own words to the tune.
Tamara was too young for school. Her parents only allowed their older children, Nashipae and Tasieku, to go to school. It was 10 kilometres away.
Nashipae and Tasieku went with other children from the village in the morning and returned in the evening. They carried food in small containers.
Tamara asked her mother, “When will I go to school?” Her mother answered, “You go soon, my dear child.”
One day, a car arrived with the chief and two ladies. The chief made sure that children went to school at the right age.
People believed that if a child was able to stretch her hand over her head and touch the ear, she was ready to start school.
The chief asked, “How old are you?” Tamara replied, “I am five years old.” “Let's see if you can go to school,” the chief said.
One of the ladies took Tamara's right arm and gently placed it over her head. Tamara touched her left ear.
Tamara would go to a different school than Nashipae and Tasieku.It was new and closer to home.
Tamara was very happy.She thought, “I will read and write like Nashipae and Tasieku.”
My little brother sleeps late. I wake early,  because I am great!
I am the one who lets in the sun.
"You're my morning star," says Ma.
I wash myself every day,  I don't need any help.
I don't mind cold water, or the blue soap that washes clothes.
Ma reminds,  "Don't forget your teeth." I reply,  "Never,  not me!"
After washing,  I greet Grandpa and Auntie. I wish them a good day.
Then I dress myself.  "I'm big now, Ma," I say.
I can close my buttons and buckle my shoes.
I make sure my brother knows all the school news.
In class I do my best in every way.
I do all these good things every day. But the thing I like most,  is to play and play!
I love my teacher.
She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She has braided her hair so nicely.
She has put colourful beads in her hair.
Her beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, please would you braid my hair like my teacher's?
When I am older I will put beads in my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
zama is getting ready for school.
Papa is preparing porridge﻿.
He wished he would get porride from mmother
Porridge will give him energy
Here you go.
He adds milk in the porridge.
He finished his porridge quickly
Finish it quickly
there was a lot left
they added salt into the porridge
OH, papa give him too much porridge
WDad, when will mom come home? asked zama
Once upon a time, there lived two sisters, Nelima and Nambuya. Their parents were dead. They lived on bare land. There was neither rain nor crops. Whoever wanted food had to go a long distance to find it.
Nelima was a humble, quiet and helpful girl. Her sister Nambuya was proud and did not listen to advice. She did not care about other people.
One day, the two sisters had nothing to eat. They would have to look for food. So Nelima and Nambuya went off in different directions.
Meanwhile, there lived an old woman called Netasile. She was believed to be a giver of riches. Netasile had leprosy and her body was full of sores.
Nambuya came across Netasile. Netasile called the Nambuya, "My daughter, how are you? Where do you come from? Where are you going?"
Nambuya answered all the questions. Then the Netasile said, "Come help me to go to my house and I will tell you what to do."
Nambuya was rude to the woman. She said, "I would rather die than touch those sores of yours." Netasile kept quiet and wished Nambuya a safe journey.
Nambuya walked for a long time. She reached a place where there were snakes, millipedes, caterpillars and other insects. She was very tired and weak from hunger. When she sat down to rest, she fell asleep. The insects began to bite her.
On her journey, Nelima came to the same old woman. She was happy to see Netasile, who was the first person she met since starting her journey. Netasile asked the same questions as she asked Nambuya.
Nelima agreed to help Netasile. "You have done what others failed to do," said the old woman. She told Nelima to go back home. There she would find everything she wanted.
Nelima was very grateful and thanked the old woman. She ran back home and found a new house with everything in it, and a lot of food. She was now rich.
But Nelima mourned the loss of her sister, Nambuya. She said to herself, "One who did not listen to advice ended up in an elephant's mouth."
This is my picture.
I am six years old.
This is a picture of my family.
My favourite food is fried fish and chips.
I can draw my hand.
I like to skip with my friend.
My telephone number is 079 523 3255.
I wake up at night feeling thirsty. I want to get some water. I start looking for my slippers under the bed.
Oh my God! There is a tiger under my bed.
Now what should I do?
Should I call Ma? What if the tiger roars?
Should I just go back to sleep? But I am not sleepy any more.
Then someone turns on the light. Ma is standing at the door.
“What happened dear?Did you call me?” asks Ma.
I point towards the tiger. Ma bends and pulls the tiger out from under the bed!
Hey, this is no tiger. This is my thick yellow and black sweater. Its buttons shine like a tiger's eyes.
I got scared for nothing!Ma gets me some water.
Now I will sleep. And dream about real tigers in a jungle!
Once upon a time, there were four friends and they decided to do a toy race.
﻿                  Rani has a shiny green car.         Pihu has a black and yellow auto.
﻿               ﻿Rohit has big red bus.      Aman has long blue lorry.
On your marks, get set, ready....  Go!!!!Here comes Lucky- the dog, joining the race.....
﻿ ﻿﻿Everybody staring at Lucky...                   The fastest of all..                         And so the winner is our Lucky!!!!
There was a man who didn't want to live close to his neighbours. And he also didn't want his wife to visit the homes of her neighbours.
One day he went and built a home way out in the bush,  far from the homes of his neighbours.
He would go out every day in the morning and come home late at night.
One night the man was very late getting home. A hyena saw what that man was doing.
The hyena went and knocked on the door of the house.
The woman,  thinking it was her husband,  opened the door. The hyena jumped on her and devoured her.
The man,  when he returned home saw that his wife had been eaten by a hyena. There was nothing he could say.
All this happened because he didn't want to live near his neighbours.
I have many friends.....
My some friends are elder than me and....
some are younger than me......
And my some friends are aged like my grand father....
And some are children too....
And some friends are such who have a tail......
And some are such who doesn't have legs.....
And some are such who even fly.....
Ohhhhhh Even books are my friends......
But do you know who is my best friend.... Who??? Who???? Who????
My MOM!!!!!
His hoe* was too short.* Long gardening tool.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was tooshort.
His bicycle was short too.
This man was too tall!
He made a hoe with a very long handle.
He made very tall  door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for there happily.
Long time ago, animals had no legs. They all used to crawl.
Only people had legs, which Maguru gave to them.
One day, Maguru decided to give legs to every animal. He wanted them to walk. He told them about it.
The animals said, "It will be very nice to have legs." They sang and danced.
The animals said it was hard to crawl.They felt pain.
When the day came, many animals went to Maguru's house. Giraffes, lions, elephants, rabbits, crocodiles and birds stood in a line.
Each animal was given four legs. Birds were given two legs each.
Everything was different after they got legs. Some danced for joy.Others fell down.
They went to show people.The animals said, "We will never crawl again."
The last one in the line was Millipede. Maguru asked, "Is thereanyone else after you?"Millipede answered, "No, I am the last one."
Maguru thought, "He is the last one. What will I do with the rest of the legs?" Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.
Millipede was very happy. He said, "I will move faster than others."
After Millipede left, Snake came to Maguru's house. He said to Maguru, "Please give me some legs."
Maguru said, "I have given out all the legs.Where were you?" Snake answered, "I overslept."
Maguru looked to see if there were legs remaining.He did not find any.
Maguru said to Snake,"Sorry, There are no legs left." Snake crawled home without legs. From that day, Snake does not sleep much. He is waiting to be first in line to get legs.
This is Karoli.Karoli looks after orphaned animals.
Karoli found a sick baby elephant. They named her Nusa.
Nusa got stronger. She played with the other animals.
One day, a helicopter came.
Another baby elephant had been found. He was given the name Miwa.
Miwa was five days' old. Karoli fed Miwa with a bottle.
A baby giraffe was brought one night.He was named Ambia.
Ambia was five months' old. He was very tired.
Karoli climbed a tree to feed Ambia.
Kopi, Kepi and Keji were three hungry cubs.They arrived on the same day.
Karoli loves all of the animals.But there are some naughty ones!
When the animals are strong, Karoli returns them to the wild.
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
Once upon a time on a little farm near a little village.
There lived a little chicken called Daisy.
"When I grow up, I want to fly high, high into the sky," Daisy said.
But all the other chickens laughed at her.
"You are so weird," they said. "We won't play with you anymore."
"Daisy, we can all flap our wings but it's very difficult for chickens to fly," Mama told her.
Daisy wouldn't give up. Every day she practised by herself, flapping her wings. Flap, flap, flap, she would flap her wings but she couldn't lift off the ground.
While she practised, she imagined herself flying high into the sky and looking at the chickens below. She imagined herself flying past the sparrows and past the swallows. "Wow!" The birds would say. "A chicken that can fly!"
So Flap, flap, flap, every day Daisy would flap her wings.
She would lift off the ground but fall down again.
"I'm never going to fly!" Daisy cried to Mama. "The others are right.""Daisy, you are different from the other chickens. They don't want to fly but you do! You can do it, " Mama said.
The following day Daisy climbed to the top of the chicken coop and flap, flap, flap, she flapped her wings. She flew into the air and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and...
BAM!The other chickens laughed out loud."Ha ha ha! We told you! Chickens can't fly!"
But the next day Daisy climbed even higher, right up to the top of the hut. Flap, flap, flap, Daisy flapped her wings.
She flew into the air andflapped her wings andflapped her wings andflapped her wings and...
She kept flying! The wind beneath her wings grew stronger and she flew higher and higher! The sparrows and the swallows said, "Amazing! A flying chicken!"
And the other chickens wanted to be just like her.
They said, "Oh Daisy, you're amazing!"
There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."
But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!
Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."
Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"
Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."
"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."
Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."
So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.
The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."
The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dusty car.
Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." "My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.
From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. And he tried his best not to get angry with her.Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided it wasn't worth the price to get angry and break things.
Sara has a canoe to cross the river.
Some women want to go across.
Some men want to go across.
They have a bicycle too.
Some animals want to go across.
They all get in the canoe.
The elephant wants to go across.
Everyone falls in!
The elephant is sad.
Sara takes the women across.
She takes the men across.
She takes the animals across.
The elephant has to walk!
Cow, Goat, and Dog went to town in a taxi. They were going shopping.
Cow bought a TV.
Goat bought a blanket.
Dog wanted to buy new shoes. But he did not have enough money.
The three friends went home in a taxi.
Did you see Cow standing in a field doing nothing? It is because she is thinking about her TV.
Did you see Goat running away from cars? It is because he is worried that someone might steal his blanket.
Did you see Dog running towards cars? Now he has enough money to buy his shoes. He wants to go to town.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
It had been raining for days, and everyone was grumpy. Everyone except Sizwe, who woke up with a smile every morning.“Yoh! Sizwe! That smile is magic!” said Gogo.“Is it for me?”Sizwe clapped his hand over his mouth.“But it’s MY smile, Gogo,” he whispered.
His mother laughed. “Sizwe! A smile is something you can give away without losing it. Look!”She lifted him up to the mirror. There was his smile, just as bright as before.
It was time to go out. Mama buttoned up Sizwe’s raincoat, and off they went, through the rain, to the library.Down the street, Sizwe’s best friend Zanele stood at the window of her house, looking sadly at the rain.Sizwe felt his smile creeping, creeping up. Before he knew it, his smile LEAPT out, and flew across the garden to Zanele.
Zanele held on tightly to the smile – it was far too precious to let it get away.As Sizwe walked away to the library, Zanele’s doorbell rang. It was the postman, with a letter from her favourite cousin.Zanele was so happy, that the smile bounced up, and beamed out at the postman.“Thank you, Mister Postman!” she said.
Zanele’s smile was the brightest thing the postman had seen all morning. It kept him warm as he trudged off through the rain.He came to a big house. Inside the gate, a dog was spinning around in circles, barking, barking, barking. He was so silly, that the postman couldn’t help smiling.The smile bounced through the gate with a glitter of glee.
The dog stopped barking. He pricked up his ears and wagged his tail. Then he turned and ran back to the house with the precious, warm smile.A bent old man opened the door. “Oh, no! You can’t come inside. You’re all wet!” he told the dog. But right away, the smile beamed up at the old man.
The old man stood a little straighter. “Eish,” he said, “Who cares if it’s raining? Let’s go for a walk, boy!” And off they went, splashing in the puddles.There, at the zebra crossing, stood grumpy Mrs Makabela, the traffic cop. She looked cold, and wet, and miserable.The old man knew just what to do. “Morning, Mrs Makabela!” he called, and smiled his biggest, brightest smile.But Mrs Makabela… did not smile back.
Standing in the rain for days can make a face sad, sad, sad.But a smile is a magical thing and, by now, the smile was so strong, and so bright, that it was very hard to keep inside.It didn’t work right away, but bit by tiny bit, it began to creep out until, at last…!A great, big smile lit up Mrs Makabela’s face!The school bell rang, and children ran to cross the road. Mrs Makabela put up her sign, and smiled, and smiled, at each and every child.
The children smiled at their moms and dads, and their gogos and tatas and brothers and sisters. They smiled at the bus driver and the greengrocer, and Mrs Makau, who went off to smile at her husband, who smiled at the mayor...The smiles leapt and rolled and beamed and gleamed until EVERYONE was smiling and giggling and laughing out loud in the rain.
In the library, everything was quiet except for the sound of the rain.“It’s time to go,” said Sizwe’s mother, closingher book.“Aw, mom!” said Sizwe, who had run out of smiles.
But as they stepped out into the street…WHAT A SIGHT!Everyone in town was there!Everyone!And they were ALL smiling!
The smiles bounced around and beamed at Sizwe. They warmed him, and tickled him, and crept up, up, up from his toes… to the TOP of his head. He was so full of happiness that the smile burst out, brilliant and beaming bright.And something changed. The dark, gloomy, rainy afternoon didn’t seem so dark anymore.Could it be…? YES!The clouds parted, and the warm sun shone down on them, with the biggest, brightest, most brilliant smile of all.
Once upon a time, it happened in a village that a gang of young people decided to kill all the old people. They wanted to stop the old people doing magic.
But one of the youths ran off with his father and hid him in the desert.
After he had done this, the gang began killing the old people.
Not long after, a snake came into the village from the desert.The snake entered into the stomach of a small child. It kept poking its head out of the child's mouth.
The parents of the child and all the other people tried everything to solve this problem.
But they saw that if they killed the snake it would also kill the child. Everyone kept trying different things.
Then, the young man who had hidden his father went and told him everything that had happened. And the old man replied, "That's the easiest thing in the world to take care of!"
The old man said, "Go find a toad and tie it up near the snake. The snake will come out of the child's stomach to catch the toad."The young man did just what his father said. The snake came out and started to chase the toad.
And the child was saved from death.
"Mom," calls Lebo. "Come and look. These clothes are all too small for me!" "Let me see," says Mom.
"Look at my skirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes,  it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your skirt."
"Look at my jeans. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jeans."
"Look at my T-shirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your T-shirt."
"Look at my jersey. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jersey."
"Look at my raincoat. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your raincoat."
"Look at my socks. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your socks."
"Look at my shoes. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your shoes."
"Now you have lots of clothes," says Lebo. "Oh no I don't," says Nomsa. "These clothes are all too big for me!"
Once upon a time, there was a hungry jackal. He was walking around the bush looking for food.
He came across a grapevine. He spotted a bunch of juicy ripe grapes hanging from a high branch.
"Those look really delicious," he thought. He took a few steps back so that he could make his highest jump.
The grapes were too high. Jackal fell on his back without even touching the bunch.
Jackal got up and went further back from his starting spot. He ran, and almost got high enough. But he fell even harder.
He tried again and again. But he couldn't get to the grapes. He kept falling until his back was very sore.
Finally, he gave up and walked away.
He stopped and looked back at the grapes. He was hungrier than ever. "Those grapes look really sour anyway," he thought.
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
This is Khalai. She is seven years old. Her name means 'the good one.'
Khalai wakes up and talks to the orange tree. "Please orange tree, grow big and give us lots of ripe oranges."
Khalai walks to school. On the way,  she talks to the grass. "Please grass,  grow greener and don't dry up."
Khalai sees flowers. "Please flowers,  keep blooming so I can put you in my hair."
Khalai talks to the tree at her school. "Please tree,  put out big branches so we can read under your shade."
Khalai talks to the hedge round her school. "Please,  grow strong and protect us from bad people."
When Khalai returns home,  she visits the orange tree. "Are your oranges ripe yet?" Khalai asks the tree.
"The oranges are still green," sighs Khalai.  "I will see you tomorrow orange tree," says Khalai. "Perhaps then,  you will have a ripe orange for me!"
Why is the sky blue?
It is not always blue. Is it?
Why are leaves green?
They are not always green. Are they?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow. Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is blood red?
There is iron in the blood. That makes it red.
Why is salt white?
I don't know!
Come back,  cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back,  cat! That's way too high.
Come back,  cat! Don't go outside.
Come back,  cat! That's not yours.
Come back,  cat! What have you got?
Come back,  cat! That's not your friend!
Hello,  cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It's nap time now.
Cat?
My friend Kiki and I walk home from school.
One day, a man followed us.
His teeth were brown. He had pimples on the face.
When we looked at him, he shouted at us angrily.
Kiki managed to run away.
They threw me into a van.
They put me in a dark room. My hands were tied.
A man said, "Eat this food. The journey is long."
As I ate, the man smoked a cigarette.
Suddenly, the other men came in pulling my friend Kiki.
We heard the men arguing and shouting in the next room.
Kiki said, "We must escape. Our parents cannot pay them."
We pulled the timber from the window until we saw light.
Kiki climbed out and ran to get help.
The men rushed into the room. The leader was angry.
They went back to the other room and continued arguing.
I heard a voice saying, "Don't be afraid. Police are here."
They were shouting and making noise. I heard some gunshots.
A policewoman said, "Everything is over. You are safe now."
After that day, Kiki and I were more careful.
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. “Why do you have a long neck?” she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. “Why does your horn have a sharp point?”
She was curious about Hippo. “Why do you have red eyes?” she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. “What does Crocodile eat for dinner?” she asked.
﻿“Never ask a question like that!” said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to baby elephant.“Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner,” squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
“Hello,” said a stone near the river bank.“Hello,” said Baby Elephant. “Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?” she asked.
“Bend down and I will tell you,” said the stone. “Lower, lower,” said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, “Snap!” Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws.“Crocodile will eat you for dinner!” squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, “Thud!” she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
Elephant is thirsty.He is happy to have the whole pond to himself.
Two giraffes are thirsty too.Will they fight over the water?
Three buffaloes want to drink water.Will they let the four birds also drink some water?
Five antelopes need some water.Can five antelopes and six warthogs drink water from the same source?
Will the seven zebras be let to drink water as well?Let's wait and see.
Frogs and fish swim in the same water.Humans can swim alongside frogs and fish.They can all drink water from the same source.
The lion roars when he arrives at the river.Can the lion, the elephant, buffaloes, the giraffe, warthogs, antelopes and birds all drink water together?
The elephant and the lion can drink water from the same river.Where does your water come from?Who do you share the water with?
My name is Simo.
Meet my new friends.
Zizo,  Lele,  Sisa and Ayanda.
Zizo loves football.
Lele loves to swim.
Sisa loves to play hide and seek.
Ayanda loves reading.
I enjoy everything my friends love.
I will play football with Zizo.
Sometimes I swim with Lele.
Or even play hide and seek with Sisa.
Come on,  make new friends and have fun.
Play football together.
Swim together.
Play hide and seek together.
Or even read together.
Once upon a time,  there lived two rats.
One rat lived in the town, one lived in the village.
One day,  the rat that lived in the town said to the rat that lived in the village,  "You eat badly and sleep badly too."
We sleep in chief's house. We eat many different kinds of food. Come and visit me and see," said the town rat."
Meanwhile the chief was furious. He cursed,  "These rats that eat my food,  they will see!" This time,  he set a trap with sugar.
The rats came in to eat the goodies in the house. They came laughing,  "Chuchuchichicheche!"
When they reached the trap the town rat said,  "Let me taste this sugar. You see the goodies we eat here."
But before the rat could take the sugar,  the trap snapped,  PA! The trap caught the rat's head,  and his eyes bulged like eggplants.
The village rat just looked,  amazed. He said,  "E. Heee! My friend,  which goodies did you eat that made your eyes bulge?"
But the town rat could not reply.
The village rat left the house saying,  "Haa! I will not manage these goodies you praise."
Your worst home is better than your neighbour's best home.
It was a little girl who first saw the mysterious shape in the distance.
As the shape moved closer, the girl saw that it was a heavily pregnant woman.
Shy but brave, the little girl moved nearer to the woman. "We must keep her with us," the little girl's people decided. "We'll keep her and her child safe."
The child was soon on its way. Everyone wanted to help. "Push!" "Bring blankets!" "Water!" "Puuuuussssshhh!"
But when they saw the baby, everyone jumped back in shock. "A donkey!"
Everyone began to argue. "We said we would keep mother and child safe, and that's what we'll do," said some. "But they will bring us bad luck!" said others.
And so the woman found herself alone again. She wondered what to do with this awkward child. She wondered what to do with herself.
But finally she had to accept that he was her child and she was his mother. Now, if the child had stayed that same, small size, everything might have been different.
But the donkey child grew and grew until he could no longer fit on his mother's back. And no matter how hard he tried, he could not behave like a human being. His mother was often tired and frustrated. Sometimes she made him do work meant for animals.
Confusion and anger built up inside Donkey. He couldn't do this and he couldn't do that. He couldn't be like this and he couldn't be like that. He became so angry that, one day, he kicked his mother to the ground.
Donkey was filled with shame. He ran away as far and as fast as he could.
By the time he stopped running, it was night, and Donkey was lost. "Hee haw?" he whispered to the darkness. "Hee Haw?" it echoed back. He was all alone. Curling himself into a tight ball, he fell into a deep and troubled sleep.
Donkey woke up to find a strange old man staring down at him. He looked into the old man's eyes and started to feel a twinkle of hope.
Donkey went to stay with the old man, who taught him many different ways to survive. Donkey listened and learned, and so did the old man. They helped each other, and they laughed together.
One morning, the old man asked Donkey to carry him to the top of a mountain.
High up amongst the clouds they fell asleep. Donkey dreamed that his mother was sick and calling to him.
When Donkey woke up, the clouds had disappeared along with his friend, the old man.
Donkey finally knew what to do.
Donkey found his mother, alone and mourning her lost child. They stared at each other for a long time. And then hugged each other very hard.
The donkey child and his mother have grown together and found many ways of living together. Slowly,  all around them, other families have started to settle.
This is Samir.He is in class four. This is me.I am in class one.
Every morning we get ready for school . I can buttonmy -----.
Samir helps me put on my -----.
Samir takes me on his -----. I ring the bell.
Samir reads big -----. He writes witha pen.
I have a small ---.Inside it are two pencils .
After school Samir plays -------. His three friends join him.
Samir hits a six. I help him findthe ----.
He buys me an --- -----. It is fiveo'clock .
It is time to go ----.
1. Shirt2. Shoes3. Cycle4. Books5. Bag6. Cricket7. Ball8. Ice-cream9. Home
Anansi the Spider, and Rabbit were friends. They lived in a peaceful village in the mountains. Rabbit owned a big farm with lots of vegetables and fruit. Even though Rabbit shared generously with his friend, Anansi was unhappy and jealous.
So Anansi thought of a clever plan to take over Rabbit's farm. Soon Rabbit was left poor and homeless. Anansi was the proud owner of all Rabbit's land, vegetables, and fruit.
Anansi went to the market to sell his fruit and vegetables. He made so much money that he filled a big basket with it! With some of the money, he bought maize for his family, and put it on top of the money in the basket.
Anansi happily headed home with his basket on his head, singing. He was thinking about all the things he was going to buy with his money.
On the way, it started to drizzle. Soon the drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. Anansi the Spider left his basket on the side of the road to shelter under a tree. But from there he kept a close watch on his precious basket.
It started to rain even more heavily, and Anansi was getting cold and wet. So he ran into a hole. "I will stay in this hole until the rain stops," said Anansi to himself. "At least my money is protected by the maize I put on top of it."
A little while later, Vulture was flying around and spotted the basket on the side of the road. He saw that there was money and maize in the basket. So he covered the basket with his wings and waited for the rain to stop.
Anansi saw Vulture sitting on his basket. "Oh thank you, my friend, for protecting my basket," he said to the Vulture. "Excuse me, Anansi, did I hear you right?" asked Vulture. "Your basket? This basket is mine! I found it here on the road side!" Anansi could not believe his ears! "It's mine, I tell you!"
Furious, Anansi went and reported the theft to the chief. But Vulture said to the chief and his elders, "How could anyone leave a basket full of money and maize unguarded on the road?" "But I was watching my basket," said Anansi. "It's my money and my maize!" "I was looking after the basket when you came and said it was yours!" replied Vulture.
When the chief and his elders had listened carefully to both sides, they sent Anansi and Vulture away. They discussed the story for a long time. Eventually they reached a decision.
They summoned Anansi and the Vulture again. "We believe Vulture's story," they said. "He is not the thief. You were trying to claim something that was not yours." Anansi could not believe his ears! He burst into tears.
The news soon spread that the judgement had gone against Anansi. As he walked away, he heard Rabbit laughing and laughing. Rabbit went back to his farm and grew fruit and vegetables. But Anansi was poor again, with no friends.
One day Tortoise was walking through the veld. He was looking for something. He gazed into the distance and squinted at the grass. Then he walked past Snail.
Snail said,  "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!" She climbed onto Tortoise's shell. Tortoise walked on with Snail on his back. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. The sun was high in the sky.
A little later they passed Sparrow. "Are you looking for something?" asked Sparrow. "Yes,  Sparrow,  I'm looking for my house. Have you seen it,  by any chance?" Sparrow said,  "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!"
He flapped his wings and he whizzed away. "But you're going too fast for me," complained Tortoise. Sparrow came back. "Alright,  then I'll hop on too."
Tortoise carried on,  with Snail and Sparrow perched on his shell. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. The sun had inched lower in the sky.
A little later they passed Ladybird. "Are you looking for something?" asked Ladybird. "Yes,  Ladybird,  I'm looking for my house. Have you seen it,  by any chance?"
Ladybird said,  "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!" She hopped onto Tortoise's back and on he went,  with Snail and Sparrow and Ladybird on his back. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. A breeze started to blow.
A little later they passed Mouse. He was making a garland of daisies. "Are you looking for something?" asked Mouse. "Yes,  Mouse,  I'm looking for my house. Have you seen it,  by any chance?"
Mouse said: "No,  I haven't,  but I'll help you look!" She hopped onto Tortoise's back. "Wait,  I can't leave my flowers behind." Tortoise waited. Mouse stretched and stretched and scooped up her daisies.
Tortoise walked on,  with Snail and Sparrow and Ladybird and Mouse on his back. They looked and looked,  but there was no sign of a house. The wind swept leaves off the ground and swirled them around Tortoise's feet. He was tired. "You lot are heavy," he sighed.
The wind got stronger. The sky turned dark. "Oh,  where is my house?" asked Tortoise. Thunder roared in the hills. Lightning flashed in the distance. Drip-drip came the rain.
The wind whirled and whipped. It blew Snail and Sparrow and Ladybird and Mouse right off Tortoise's back.
And then came the hail,  tip-tip-tip. Tortoise got such a fright he shrank into his shell. It was warm and cosy in there. "Oh,  here is my house!" smiled Tortoise.
"Oh,  here is Tortoise's house!" said Snail and Robin and Mouse.
Nandi sat on the blue steps of her house.
She was wondering...
What if jelly beans made you jump really high? You could get to school in one big leap!
What if goats and chickens could talk? Would they tell good jokes?
What if houses were rocket ships? Your family could go on holidays to the moon!
What if no one had to cook? What if supper just arrived on the table?(And it was always your favourite.)
What if ice-lollies never melted? They could last all summer.
What if the pictures in books flew around your head when Dad read to you?
What if my pink gumboots were magical? I could run faster than my big brother!
What if you squeezed your eyes shut and...
“Nandi, what are you doing?” asked Nandi’s big brother. Nandi sat back on the step with a big smile on her face.
“Just wondering,” she said.
Hamisi needs a new school uniform. His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boy wearing a beautiful shirt. "That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like the one that boy has," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. He has enough money left over to buy a shirt for Hamisi!
It is Hamisi's lucky day! Which shirt will he choose?
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night.Because they weremade of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! Hemelted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose,he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Long ago, animals had no legs.
Maguru had given legs only to people.
Maguru decided to give legs to every animal.
The animals wanted legs to walk and run.
It was hard for them to crawl.
When the day came, different animals crawled to Maguru's house.
Maguru gave legs to animals and birds.
Some animals danced, while others fell down.
They said, "We will never crawl again."
Millipede was the last animal on the line.
Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.
Millipede said happily, “I will move faster than others.”
After Millipede, Snake came begging, “Please give me some legs.”
Snake said to Maguru, "I over-slept."
Maguru did not find any legs for Snake.
From that day, Snake still waits to get legs.
Knock! Knock!
"Who is there?" I ask sleepily.
"It is me," a shrill voice says.
"Who is 'me'?" I ask.
"I told you,  it is o-n-l-y m-e," the same voice says.
"I don't know anyone called,  'o-n-l-y m-e'," I reply. I check that my mosquito net is tucked in around my bed.
"Well, my name is Amos." The voice sounds more shrill than before. It is very close to my ear.
"Amos who?" I ask as I look under the net.
"Amos Quito," the voice finally says. I feel a bite on my ear.
"Ouch!" I jump up and begin to search. "You will pay for this!" I shout.
Angrily, I get out of bed and switch on the light.
I declare war on the annoying Amos Quito!
This house is in Congo. I like this house.
We had our own bathroom.We had our own toilet.
We had a garden. I was planting my own garden.
My mother told me, "My mother taught me to plant. Now I am teaching you."
I planted tomatoes and spinach. I did it alone.
I would take tomatoes to my mother.She would say, "Thank you."
We have no garden here in South Africa.
An old woman had chickens and an old rooster.
Her grandson visited her. She decided to kill the old rooster.
The old rooster ran away to the big city.
The old rooster met the cat running away from her boss.
The old rooster and the cat met the dog running away.
They were joined by a horse which was running away too.
The animals came to a house. They saw thieves inside!
The animals sang loudly to chase away the thieves.
They ate the food they found in the house.
The thieves returned later. The animals attacked them.
The thieves ran away forever.
The animals lived together happily in the house.
One day, all the wild animals got together to choose a king. They saw that it would be good to choose Lion to be the king of the animals.
At that meeting, they crowned Lion the king of the animals. As part of the ceremony, they had a big party that lasted a week. All of the animals attended the ceremony until the end. They ate, they drank, they sang and they danced.
When the ceremony was over, they all dispersed. They were returning to their homes. It was the custom for every animal to go and greet Lion because he was their king.
One visitor who came to greet King Lion was Hyena. When Hyena arrived at Lion's house, he found the king in bed. Lion told him, "I'm sick with an incurable illness."
Hyena responded, "O, Great King, don't be sad because of your illness. Hare knows the cure for this illness."
The reason Hyena said this was because he wanted to get Hare in trouble in the eyes of Lion. Hyena knew that Hare was unable to heal Lion. Lion cheered up and sent Hyena right away to call Hare.
Hyena ran to call Hare and said, "Let's go to the king, because he is very sick. He sent me to call you." Hare went to the king. "I have come, Great King! I heard that the king has need of me, and so I have come," said Hare.
Lion answered, "I am exceedingly happy to see you close to me, my Hare. I myself have called you,  because my life is hanging by a thread. I have an incurable illness. But Hyena whispered to me that you have the cure for this illness of mine."
And Hare replied, "You are correct, King Lion. I am able to heal this illness. But the medicine is very difficult to get." Lion replied, "Don't you worry, Hare, about this medicine being difficult to find. The bird that flies is the one that is caught. Come on now, tell us about this medicine!"
Hare said, "O my King, when I say that the medicine is hard to find I don't mean that it is far away. For you to be healed at once, you must make an ointment from the heart of a hyena."
When he heard that, Hyena started trembling all over. He was the very one who had told Lion that Hare knew the medicine for that illness. It was useless to now try to contradict Hare regarding the medicine.
So Hyena ran away and never again went to visit Lion.
One day I met Agnes.Agnes is a teacher.
Agnes uses crutches to walk.
When I went to town, I saw Metobo. He is a radio DJ.
Metobo has albinism.He has problems with his eyes and with his skin.
My neighbour isMoraa. She is a farmer.
Moraa has a problem with hearing. She speaks using Sign language.
Osero is the best soccer player in my school. I like to watch him play.
Osero lost his hands in an accident. However, he scores many goals for his team!
I always wear a mask when I go out.A mask protects me. And it protects others.
I wash my hands with soap and water before I leave home.And when I arrive home, too.
When I greet my friend, we only touch our elbows!
My grandfather was very sick. He went to hospital.Dad called every day for news about grandfather.
Grandfather was fit and healthy before he got sick.He got better.
Then, my brother started coughing."My throat is sore," he said.
"Cough into your elbow!" said auntie."Wear a mask. Keep your distance! Stay in your bed!" she told him.
So, my brother stayed in his bed and read.
There lived a girl called Kalabushe. She talked a lot.
One day, Kalabushe’s aunt fell ill.
That evening, Kalabushe took food to her sick aunt.
Kalabushe met a hyena who had changed into a person.
Kalabushe told him, “I am carrying meat, eggs and milk.”
The hyena licked his lips as he thought about meat.
The hyena ran ahead of Kalabushe to her aunt’s house.
He swallowed Kalabushe’s aunt. He covered himself with her blanket.
Kalabushe arrived and called out, “Aunt, where are you?”
Kalabushe saw someone covered with a big blanket.
Kalabushe asked, “Aunt, why are your ears so big today?”
“Aunt, why are your eyes so big?”
“Aunt, why is your mouth big?” The hyena swallowed her!
Kalabushe kept asking questions while inside the hyena’s stomach.
He became tired of Kalabushe’s questions. He spat her out.
Kalabushe and her aunt were rescued by the villagers.
When Simbegwire's mother died,  she was very sad. Simbegwire's father did his best to take care of his daughter. Slowly,  they learned to feel happy again,  without Simbegwire's mother. Every morning they sat and talked about the day ahead. Every evening they made dinner together. After they washed the dishes,  Simbegwire's father helped her with homework.
One day,  Simbegwire's father came home later than usual. "Where are you my child?" he called. Simbegwire ran to her father. She stopped still when she saw that he was holding a woman's hand. "I want you to meet someone special,  my child. This is Anita," he said smiling.
"Hello Simbegwire,  your father told me a lot about you," said Anita. But she did not smile or take the girl's hand. Simbegwire's father was happy and excited. He talked about the three of them living together,  and how good their life would be. "My child,  I hope you will accept Anita as your mother," he said.
Simbegwire's life changed. She no longer had time to sit with her father in the mornings. Anita gave her so many household chores that she was too tired to do her school work in the evenings. She went straight to bed after dinner. Her only comfort was the colourful blanket her mother gave her. Simbegwire's father did not seem to notice that his daughter was unhappy.
After a few months,  Simbegwire's father told them that he would be away from home for a while. "I have to travel for my job," he said. "But I know you will look after each other." Simbegwire's face fell,  but her father did not notice. Anita did not say anything. She was not happy either.
Things got worse for Simbegwire. If she didn't finish her chores,  or she complained,  Anita hit her. And at dinner,  the woman ate most of the food,  leaving Simbegwire with only a few scraps. Each night Simbegwire cried herself to sleep,  hugging her mother's blanket.
One morning,  Simbegwire was late getting out of bed. "You lazy girl!" Anita shouted. She pulled Simbegwire out of bed. The precious blanket caught on a nail,  and tore in two.
Simbegwire was very upset. She decided to run away from home. She took the pieces of her mother's blanket,  packed some food,  and left the house. She followed the road her father had taken.
When it came to evening,  she climbed a tall tree near a stream and made a bed for herself in the branches. As she went to sleep,  she sang: Maama,  maama,  maama,  you left me. You left me and never came back. Father doesn't love me anymore. Mother,  when are you coming back? You left me.
The next morning,  Simbegwire sang the song again. When the women came to wash their clothes at the stream,  they heard the sad song coming from the tall tree. They thought it was only the wind rustling the leaves,  and carried on with their work. But one of the women listened very carefully to the song.
This woman looked up into the tree. When she saw the girl and the pieces of colourful blanket,  she cried,  "Simbegwire,  my brother's child!" The other women stopped washing and helped Simbegwire to climb down from the tree. Her aunt hugged the little girl and tried to comfort her.
Simbegwire's aunt took the child to her own house. She gave Simbegwire warm food,  and tucked her in bed with her mother's blanket. That night,  Simbegwire cried as she went to sleep. But they were tears of relief. She knew her aunt would look after her.
When Simbegwire's father returned home,  he found her room empty. "What happened,  Anita?" he asked with a heavy heart. The woman explained that Simbegwire had run away. "I wanted her to respect me," she said. "But perhaps I was too strict." Simbegwire's father left the house and went in the direction of the stream. He continued to his sister's village to find out if she has seen Simbegwire.
Simbegwire was playing with her cousins when she saw her father from far away. She was scared he might be angry,  so she ran inside the house to hide. But her father went to her and said,  "Simbegwire,  you have found a perfect mother for yourself. One who loves you and understands you. I am proud of you and I love you." They agreed that Simbegwire would stay with her aunt as long as she wanted to.
Her father visited her every day. Eventually,  he came with Anita. She reached out for Simbegwire's hand. "I'm so sorry little one,  I was wrong," she cried. "Will you let me try again?" Simbegwire looked at her father and his worried face. Then she stepped forward slowly and put her arms around Anita.
The next week,  Anita invited Simbegwire,  with her cousins and aunt,  to the house for a meal. What a feast! Anita prepared all of Simbegwire's favourite foods,  and everyone ate until they were full. Then the children played while the adults talked. Simbegwire felt happy and brave. She decided that soon,  very soon,  she would return home to live with her father and her stepmother.
Oscar has a problem with his eyes. He cannot see any fish.
But he will not eat his carrots.
Johnnie the seahorse says, "Oscar, eat your carrots!"
But Oscar does not like the taste of carrots.
"Carrots will help you to see better," says Johnnie.
Oscar goes to the doctor. Oscar and Johnnie wait for Dr Shakes.
Dr Shakes says, "Glasses will help you to see better."
Oscar does not want to wear glasses.
But they help Oscar see the fishes. Now he eats his carrots with fish!
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night. Because they were made of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! He melted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose, he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Why is the baby crying?
I think she is hungry.
Why is the boy sad?
I think he is missing his father.
Why is the girl happy?
She has a new dress.
Why is the old man laughing?
He read a good joke.
Why is the lady smiling?
Her children are reading quietly.
What is this lady feeling?I think she is feeling shy.
Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn,  and no tail.
It is fat,  with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze,  this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow,  what would you do?
Keke sat on her swing. She loved her swing. It was the best swing at her school.
Keke moved slowly on her swing. Backwards and forwards,  backwards and forwards. When Keke moved,  her swing went faster and faster. Soon she was right at the top.
Keke looked down at the ground. She was very high up. "Aeei!" she called.  "Look how high I am!"
She was happy to be so high. She could see the whole village. She was nearly as high as birds flying over the cornfields.
After a while Keke wanted to come down. The swing would not stop. "Oh,  oh,  oh," she called. "I don't know how to stop this swing!"
The swing went on and on. Up and down,  up and down. Keke was frightened. "Where will this swing take me? I might go up to the moon. I must get off!" she cried.
So,  Keke let go of the swing. She fell down,  down,  down.
"Oh,  oh,  oh!" cried the other children.  Keke fell onto the ground. She hurt her head. "Eeeeh,  eeeeh,  eeeh," she cried.
The other children were very worried. Keke did not know what to do. "Eeeeh,  eeeeh,  eeeh," she cried.
The children called their teacher. "M'e Mpho, please come!" they called. "Keke fell off the swing. She has hurt her head."
M'e Mpho ran to the swing. She picked up Keke and kissed her head. Keke smiled,  "That's better. I will not go on that swing by myself again," she said. "I never want to go to the moon."
"Next time I will be with you on your swing,  Keke," said M'e Mpho. "We can go to the moon together!"
One day, Mr Sloth came to visit. He said: I’m sleepy! I need a good branch for a bed! Yawn! Yawn! Yawn!
I’m quite good at climbing. I know how to swing.But sleeping’s my favourite, favourite thing!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth! A giraffe’s eating there!He might think you’re lunch and start nibbling your hair!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth! There’s a beehive right there! You’ll never get sleep with those bees everywhere!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth, that’s a snake over there! Not a branch! Poor old snake. You gave him quite a scare. Sssssss! sssSSSs! SSss! Ssss!
This branch looks lovely! I think I’ll sleep here. And you? Don’t you think that’s a splendid idea?
Oh no, Mr Sloth!There’s a bird squawking there! You’ll never get sleep with that noise in the air!Haw-haw! Haw-Haw! Haw-haw!
Try climb one more branch, Mr Sloth! they all said. And that branch was just the right one for his bed.
The bird and the snake, the giraffe and each bee. Were happy to have Mr Sloth in their tree.
Where is my cat?
Is it under the bed?
Is it on top of the cupboard?
Is it behind the couch?
Is it next to the bin?
Is it inside the basket?
Is it outside the house?
Here it is!
One day, Chameleon challenged Rabbit to a race to see who was faster.
Rabbit accepted and said, "You are so slow! You start with one foot, then stop and start with the other." He boasted, "I'm going to leave you far behind. You'll never catch me!"
They invited all the animals to come and watch the race.
Chameleon and Rabbit lined up and waited for the signal.
As the race began, Chameleon jumped onto Rabbit's tail.
The animals laughed and laughed.Rabbit did not realise that Chameleon was on his tail.
Hearing the noise, Rabbit skidded to a stop. Chameleon jumped off Rabbit's tail."Hey, watch where you're going! It's about time you got here," Chameleon shouted at Rabbit.
Rabbit was amazed. He started running again.He did not know that Chameleon had once again jumped onto his tail.
As Rabbit approached the finish line, the animals saw that Chameleon was still on Rabbit's tail. They clapped and laughed.Rabbit heard the noise and thought that Chameleon had already arrived ahead of him.
When they arrived at the finish line, Chameleon jumped off Rabbit's tail. "Don't step on me! I got here first!" Chameleon shouted at Rabbit.
Rabbit stormed off in a rage. Chameleon stayed to receive the prize, and Rabbit lost.
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. “Ants don’t read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need.”
Little Ant would read all day, he’d read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down.
The ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. “A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read.”
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said “Hey, there’s one!”
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger, carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand “Now I think I understand.” “The way you love to read a book … Makes me want to take alook.”
Once upon a time, there was a little girl called Tselane. After her father died, she lived alone with her mother. One day, her mother decided that they would move to another village to start a new life. Tselane did not want to leave her old village and she started to cry.
Her mother was scared to leave her daughter alone because giants lived in the caves nearby that village. But Tselane cried so much that her mother finally agreed that she could stay behind.
Tselane's mother told her that she would bring food every day. She said, "I will sing a song so that you know it's me. Don't open the door for anyone else, my child." She sang the song: "Tselane my child! Tselane my child! Come out and eat your porridge! Come out and eat your porridge!"
The next morning Tselane's mother came to the house with food. She sang their special song. Tselane opened the door and took her mother's delicious food. Then her mother kissed her and went back to her new home.
A giant was hiding in the bushes, watching and listening to Tselane and her mother! After Tselane switched off her light that night, she heard a deep voice singing her mother's song outside the door. "Tselane my child! Come out and eat your porridge!" sang the giant. "Go away! You are not my mother! You are a giant!" shouted Tselane.
The giant walked away disappointed and disappeared into the caves. Every morning and every evening, Tselane's mother brought her food. Every morning and every evening, the giant also came. But each time Tselane sent him away. She recognised his deep voice as he sang her mother's song.
One day the giant had an idea. "I can change my voice to resemble that of Tselane's mother!" he said to himself. He made a fire and threw a round smooth stone into the flames. When the stone was very hot and red, he took it out of the fire and swallowed it! "Kudutlu!" went the hot stone down the throat of the giant.
The giant started singing. He jumped for joy when he heard his voice sounding as sweet as that of Tselane's mother! The next day, the giant went to Tselane's house early in the morning. When he got to the door of the house, he sang: "Tselane my child! Tselane my child! Come out and eat your porridge! Come out and eat your porridge!"
Tselane was excited to hear her mother's voice. She opened the door, and there was the giant! She tried to close the door but the giant was too quick. He grabbed Tselane and threw her into a sack.
The happy giant walked back to his cave. "What a beautiful day! If only I had traditional beer, it would go so well with my dinner tonight," he said to himself.
A little later in the morning, Tselane's mother came as usual to bring her daughter food. She sang her song, but Tselane did not come out. She sang her song again, but still Tselane did not come out. After singing for the third time, she kicked the door open. Tselane was nowhere to be found. Her mother realised what had happened, and she quickly made a plan.
She poured some beer into a big calabash, put it on her head, and walked down to the caves. "Good evening, giant!" called Tselane's mother. The giant smelled the delicious smell of traditional beer and opened the door. Tselane's mother said, "I was passing through and I heard you singing so beautifully. I am on my way to another village for a party."
"Let me pour you some beer," said Tselane's mother. The giant was not going to let the opportunity of drinking traditional beer pass him by! Tselane's mother went into his cave. The giant drank the beer in one great gulp. Tselane's mother gave him more and more, and more, until the calabash was empty. The giant was soon so drunk that he fell asleep on the floor.
As soon as Tselane's mother heard the giant's loud snores, she opened the sack lying in the cave. Tselane jumped out of the sack, and they ran home as fast as they could. From then on Tselane stayed with her mother at the new village. They lived happily and were never again bothered by giants.
Let me tell you my story. I start as a small spark.
I spread when the wind carries me.
We are good friends,  you and I.
I cook your food.
I light your night.
I have many tricks.
I am part of your family.
But be careful when you invite me to your home. I don't like to be left alone.
Come back, cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back, cat! That’s way too high.
Come back, cat! Don’t go outside.
Come back, cat! That’s not yours.
Come back, cat. What have you got?
Come back, cat.  That’s not your friend!
Hello, cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It’s nap time now.
Cat?
Long, long ago there was a king called Kayanja. He lived in a palace with his queen and their daughter, Princess Apenyo. Princess Apenyo was such a beautiful young woman that every man wanted to marry her. But king Kayanja demanded a very high bride price for the princess.
Near king Kayanja's palace lived a chief called Aludah the Great. He was called "the Great" because everybody in the neighbourhood obeyed him, and he was very violent to anyone who disobeyed him! Chief Aludah's wife had recently died of malaria, and he wanted another wife.
So the fat old chief went to king Kayanja to offer bride wealth for the young princess. While the two men were discussing the price, the maid Kakembo overheard their conversation. Maid Kakembo was very close to princess Apenyo.
Chief Aludah agreed to give half of his wealth to king Kayanja, including a needle, which was also part of the bride price. Preparations were made in secret for the wedding between chief Aludah and princess Apenyo. The king knew that his daughter would not be happy with this decision.
One week before the royal wedding day, maid Kakembo approached Apenyo. "My dear Princess,  your father has organised your wedding with chief Aludah, and it will take place in one week."
Princess Apenyo was shocked and at first didn't know what to do. Then she thought, "I will never marry chief Aludah, that fat old man. Never! I must hurry to Trevor and see what he can do before it's too late." Trevor was princess Apenyo's boyfriend.
That night Apenyo crept out of the palace. If her father discovered where she was going he would be very angry. She ran through the thick, dark forest over rocks and shrubs. When finally she arrived at Trevor's house she was tired and thirsty.
"My love, why have you run all this long distance alone and at such a time of night?" asked Trevor. He fetched water for her and allowed her to rest. Trevor could not settle down while he waited for Apenyo to talk.
"My dear princess, what is the problem?" asked Trevor. Apenyo breathed heavily and said sadly, "My father wants to marry me off to chief Aludah the Great. But I can't marry that horrible man. Trevor, I want to marry you even if you are poor. I am ready to suffer. I love you."
"But princess, I have nothing to pay as your bride price, you know I'm a poor boy," cried Trevor. Apenyo replied, "I know, but it's only you I can get married to." She thought for a while and said, "Let's go to Kategga the boatman and ask him to take us across the river. That way we can escape and my father will never find us."
Back at the palace, king Kayanja had discovered princess Apenyo's disappearance. He ordered his subjects to search for her everywhere. The king's guards, soldiers, and everyone else searched, but they couldn't find the princess. They went back to the king and told him that Apenyo was nowhere to be seen. "Then go back and search again," King Kayanja ordered. He was very annoyed.
As Princess Apenyo and Trevor hurried to the riverbank, dark clouds began gathering in the sky. A heavy storm was coming.
Kategga the boatman was mooring his boat when the young couple approached him. Trevor asked Kategga to row them across the river. Kategga refused to accept, explaining that a heavy storm was fast approaching, and it would be too dangerous.
Trevor insisted and explained to Kategga why they must cross. He then put his hand deep in his pocket and took out a cowrie shell to give to Kategga. When Kategga heard their story and saw the beautiful shell, he felt sorry for them. He agreed to row them across the river in spite of the weather.
When King Kayanja and chief Aludah reached the bank, they saw the three people in the boat. They realised that the young lovers had escaped. Heavy winds rocked the boat and Kategga could no longer control it. King Kayanja shouted, "Apenyo, please come back! I forgive you. I will never punish you or Trevor."
But, it was too late. The boat tipped over and the three people were thrown into the wild water. They all drowned. After that day, everyone in king Kayanja's kingdom could marry anyone they wanted, rich or poor.
His hoe was too short.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was too short.
His bicycle was too short.
This man was too tall!
He made a very long hoe handle.
He made very high door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for many years.
How many cats? 0 Zero cats.
How many cats? 1 One cat.
How many cats? 2 Two cats.
How many cats? 3 Three cats.
How many cats? 4 Four cats.
How many cats? 5 Five cats.
How many cats? 6 Six cats.
How many cats? 7 Seven cats.
How many cats? 8 Eight cats.
What is this we see? A kitten is stuck in a tree! "I will rescue you!"
"Mama,  can we keep him? Just one more!" How many cats? 9 Nine cats.
Zama is getting ready for school.
Dad is cooking porridge for breakfast. He mixes it with milk.
"Mummy has got the sweetest breast milk!" says Zama.
Milk has got fats, vitamins, calcium which gives Zama alot of energy for school.
The milk is ready.
Dad pours the milk,  with love.
"Dad,  I think this porridge needs more sugar and milk," says Zama.
"Mummy's milk tastes much better than Dad's milk," says Zama.
"Dad,  please in this milk asks Zama."
Dad adds sugar to Zama's milk.
"Wu! Dad! You added water in my milk!"
"Dad,  when will Mom be home?" asks Zama.
Once upon a time there lived two friends,  Tortoise and Snake.
On day Tortoise said to Snake,  "Let us go and swim." "Alright,  but I don't know to swim," answered Snake. "I will teach you," replied Tortoise.
They went to a swimming pool. "Who will enter the water first?" asked Tortoise. "You will,  and I will watch you," said Snake.
Tortoise entered the swimming pool. Snake observed from the steps.
After some time,  Snake entered the pool as Tortoise gave instructions.
Tortoise and Snake swam in the shallow end of the pool.
They started floating on the water.
As they were floating,  Tortoise started swimming backstroke. While imitating Tortoise,  Snake could not propel himself and started drowning.
On realising that Snake had disappeared,  Tortoise hurriedly went under water and rescued the life of the snake.
As soon as Tortoise got out of the water,  he turned Snake upside-down in order to get rid of the water that Snake swallowed.
Finally,  Tortoise used the mouth-to-mouth method to remove more water.
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. "Why do you have a long neck?" she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. "Why does your horn have a sharp point?"
She was curious about Hippo. "Why do you have red eyes?" she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. "What does Crocodile eat for dinner?" she asked.
"Never ask a question like that!" said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to Baby Elephant. "Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner," squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
"Hello," said a stone near the river bank. "Hello," said Baby Elephant. "Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?" she asked.
"Bend down and I will tell you," said the stone. "Lower, lower," said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, "Snap!" Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws. "Crocodile will eat you for dinner!" squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, "Thud!" she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
Chanri and Boipelo are going on an adventure around South Africa. Their journey starts in Kimberley, in the Northern Cape. In Kimberley you will find the Big Hole!
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they travel to Cape Town in the Western Cape. Chanri and Boipelo pick juicy grapes at the farms.
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, then they head off to Bhisho, in the Eastern Cape.The two friends have fun at the Elephant Park!
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they pass through the Free State. They admire all the pretty roses blooming in Bloemfontein.
On to Mahikeng, in the North West. The train slows down to meet Rina the rhino at the National Park. Then our friends speed on to Polokwane, in Limpopo.
Toot-toot toot-toot! They're running late, so the train doesn't stop in Johannesburg, Gauteng. From the train they see many cars and people in this busy city of gold.
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they travel to Emalahleni, in Mpumalanga. They visit a big coal factory to get fuel for their train.
Chanri and Boipelo end their train journey in Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal.They share sweet bananas with their friends, and talk about their adventure around the country.Do you remember the provinces and their cities?
One day,  Rabbit was walking by the riverside.
Hippo was there too,  going for a stroll and eating some nice green grass.
Hippo didn't see that Rabbit was there and she accidentally stepped on Rabbit's foot. Rabbit started screaming at Hippo,  "You Hippo! Can't you see that you're stepping on my foot?"
Hippo apologised to Rabbit,  "I'm so sorry. I didn't see you. Please forgive me!" But Rabbit wouldn't listen and he shouted at Hippo,  "You did that on purpose! Someday,  you'll see! You're going to pay!"
Rabbit went to find Fire and said,  "Go,  burn Hippo when she comes out of the water to eat grass. She stepped on me!"  Fire answered,  "No problem,  Rabbit,  my friend. I'll do just what you ask."
Later,  Hippo was eating grass far from the river when,  "Whoosh!" Fire burst into flame. The flames began to burn Hippo's hair.
Hippo started to cry and ran for the water. All her hair was burned off by the fire. Hippo kept crying,  "My hair has burned in the fire! My hair is all gone! My beautiful hair!"
Rabbit was happy that Hippo's hair was burned. And to this day,  for fear of fire,  the hippo never goes far from the water.
The trendy cool caterpillar had a collection of trendy cool boots. There were so many he had to store them on shelves!
The caterpillar had so many legs that he needed so many boots. Sometimes he slipped when he walked. It took him an hour to put on his boots, so he would leave them on all day long!
Dragonfly and ant saw the caterpillar coming. They couldn't believe how many boots he had. They thought he was weird.
"Why do you wear so many boots?" said the ant. "Is there something wrong with your feet?""I like to look trendy and cool," said the caterpillar.
"Don't you worry that others will stare at you?" said the insect."I like the way I look," said the caterpillar.
The caterpillar carried on proudly, with his clinking and clanking boots making sounds through the soil.
But when he fell over, it was a disaster. With nobody to help, the trendy cool caterpillar had to struggle and stumble and get himself onto his feet, one by one.But the more he fell, the more he learned how to stay upright.
"One day he'll get over it and be a real caterpillar, showing his feet," said dragonfly. "It's just a phase. He'll come around to our way of thinking."
But caterpillar knew that one day he would not need boots, because he would be a butterfly.  He learned to walk his own way, and try his own style, despite what others said or thought. He felt free. And he was a very trendy, cool and happy caterpillar, who occasionally fell.
Sonu wore a blue shirt after his bath. Monu and Rina wore blue socks.
Oh,we are all dressed in the same colour today!Come, let us see some other colours!
Hereare Dadi's red chillies, don't touch them!
Aha,Bholu is cutting purple brinjals.
Rani Didi has sunshineyellowlemons.
Colours are fun to see. Now toeat something colourful too! Yummy! Should we eat a pink chuski?
Or a creamy white kulfi?
We can drink tangy greenjaljeera.
Or we can have sweet browndates?
But Ramu's guavas are thebest.
Green on the outside,pinkinside, with pure white salt and red chilli powder!
Yayeri the great one wakes up very early every morning. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She is grateful for the night past. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She prepares her bed very well. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She greets her parents and grandparents. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She cleans her face with blue soap. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She brushes her teeth with the lughano stem. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She takes a cold water bath. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She puts on her orange school uniform. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She puts on her black shoes.We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She hurries to her school at Mbala. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She studies Science,  Social Studies and Mathematics. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
She sings,  dances,  and plays football. We ask ourselves,  "Why is Yayeri great?"
I like my teacher very much.
She is beautiful. She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.
She braided her hair pretty nice.
She placed colorful beads in her hair.
The beads are green, white, red, and yellow.
Mom, could you please braid my hair just like my teacher's?
When I grow older, I will also place colorful beads on my hair.
I will grow up to be just like my teacher!
Sherry has got very little hair. But she looks smart.
Nandi has plated hair. She looks smart too.
Cathy has the longest hair.
Tom covers his hair whenever it is raining.
Uncle Jimmy has beards.
Nebanda normally combs her hair nicely before she lives for any function.
Tabo has cut his hair.
Mubbalya has shaved his hair off.
Long time ago, there lived an orphan boy called Pasitau. Pasitau's parents were killed by robbers when he was only six months old. As the villagers mourned the death of Pasitau's parents, they wondered what would become of the young boy.
After the burial, Sausau, the village headman called a meeting. Sausau was respected and feared at the same time because of the way he dressed and talked. His hair was long and fell on his back. It was believed that Sausau lived in the forest long before trees were cut down and houses were built.
During the meeting, Lokeyokoni, a very rich villager, adopted Pasitau. Lokeyokoni had many sons and daughters. The daughters helped their mother with household chores while the sons went out to graze their father's big herd of cattle.
Pasitau grew up in this family and was very happy. He was loved and he loved everybody. He enjoyed grazing the animals in the fields.
Pasitau loved one particular cow so much that he gave it the name 'Sitau'. Sitau was the oldest cow in the whole herd. For this reason, the owner valued it a lot.
One day, when the boys were out grazing the animals, it started raining and they had to shelter under a tree. The rain fell for many hours until it was dark. When it eventually stopped raining, the boys went to collect the animals and take them home but there were no animals to be seen.
They were afraid of what their father would do to them if they arrived home without the animals. When they could not trace the cattle, two boys decided to go to their uncle's home while two others went to their aunt's place. Pasitau decided to continue looking for the animals till he found them. He had no uncle or aunt to run to.
Pasitau followed all the tracks that he knew while singing the name of his favourite cow. This is how the song went: Piii pi Sitau! Piii pi Sitau! Chaka akula chi! Chaka orete chi!
Pasitau went on singing the song throughout the night. He stepped on the cow dung but it was cold. He then stepped on the urine but it was cold as well. Pasitau did not give up.
At dawn, Pasitau reached a small village and found the animals in the care of the village headman. He pleaded with the headman to let him lead the animals home, but the headman refused.
Frustrated, Pasitau started singing his song as he turned to go home. It was then that Sitau, the oldest cow, heard Pasitau. Sitau raised her ears and started following Pasitau. All the animals broke from the enclosure and followed Pasitau. He lead them home.
When they reached home, villagers were waiting because they had heard Pasitau's voice from far. They all sang songs praising Pasitau. Lokeyokoni thanked Pasitau and bought him a red bag for carrying books to school. And that is how Pasitau started going to school.
Khayanga lived with her parents happily until they died when she was ten years old.
Khayanga was taken in by Rosa,  a distant relative. Rosa was kind to Khayanga, but she was old,  frail and poor.
Khayanga often visited her parents' graves to tell them of her misery.
One day when she visited, she received a gift. It was a very special Gourd which appeared from her parents' graves.
The Gourd sang a beautiful and soothing song. Khayanga recognised the voice as that of her late mother. It went like this.
Khayanga carried her special Gourd everywhere. With her Gourd, Khayanga felt her parents' presence and protection.
One day,  something bad happened to her special Gourd. It broke when she was fetching water in the river. Khayanga's heart broke as well.
Khayanga held the pieces of the broken Gourd in her small hands and sang:
Khayanga heard her mother's voice saying to her: "Our child,  pick up the pieces that are left. Fetch water with them and wash your feet. When you finish washing, close your eyes." Khayanga obeyed and suddenly, the broken Gourd became whole once again.
Khayanga continued to carry her Gourd everywhere she went. Wherever she passed, people whispered to each other, "What type of gourd is this?" With her special Gourd, Khayanga received everything she needed.
With the special Gourd, Khayanga knew that her parents were watching over her. Nothing bad could happen to her.
In a tiny village of  Lumela, lives a little boy called Chipego.  Chipego lives with his father, mother and his  little sister Mutinta.  There is one more special member of the family, Pendo the cow. Chipego helps his father to look after Pendo in exchange for pocket money that he uses to buy books. Meet Chipego. He is 10 years old and in Grade 5 at the village school. Chipego always comes top of his class. "What's his secret?" his schoolmates ask themselves."He's excellent in reading and writing. How does he do it?" they wonder. Chipego tells them it is because he reads lots of books. While they waste their time doing nothing, he spends all his free time reading.
Chipego sometimes earns K80.00 a week in pocket money. He spends most of the pocket money on books at the second-hand book shop in his village.So how does Chipego earn enough pocket money for these books? Read on to find out.
Meet Pendo, the family's milking cow. She produces over 20 litres of milk per day. Chipego's father sells the milk.A cow needs food and water, and time to graze in the field. So each day after school, Chipego helps with this work. Chipego's father gives him pocket money for the work he does. And it is this money that Chipego saves to buy books each week.
First, Chipego gives Pendo a bunch of carrots. He gives her exactly eight carrots a day. Each day he picks the carrots from his father's vegetable garden, enough for a day at a time.You can work it out. You will find that Pendo eats nearly 60 carrots a week. Can you tell exactly how many?
After that, Chipego takes Pendo to graze in the fields. His father warned him to watch the time and give Pendo not  more than three quarters of an hour to graze.Pendo usually starts grazing at about14:15 hrs, so that Chipego can take her back to the milking shed at 15 hours. In winter when it gets dark earlier, Chipego may start grazing earlier, around 13:30 hrs.
Next Chipego gives Pendo water. Without water Pendo won't produce milk, no matter how much Chipego feeds her. Chipego fetches buckets of water from the village pump because there isn't one nearby.Pendo's trough holds about 30 litres of water. Chipego's bucket only holds 5 litres. So to fill the trough Chipego has to make many trips. Can you work out how many trips he has to make?
Then, Chipego takes Pendo to his father to get her daily 12 kg bag of grain. Chipego calculates that's almost 90 kg a week.Each bag costs K39.00. Chipego works out the cost of grain for each week. First he works out the cost of 7 bags at K40.00, which makes K280.00 Then he subtracts K7.00 to get K273.00 "That's over K1 000 a month!" Chipego estimates. Is he correct?
Chipego's father milks Pendo twice a day. She produces about 24 litres of milk a day, so about 12 litres for each milking.Sometimes Chipego helps with the milking but it is not as easy as it looks. "One day," he thinks to himself, "I will have my own cows and I will have to do all the milking myself."
His father pours the milk from the big bucket into smaller two litre cans or one litre bottles. He then sells the milk for K8.00 a litre.Once a week Chipego's father donates 25 litres of milk to Bulela School feeding scheme. Each child gets a quarter litre of this milk. That means that 100 children get milk on this day.
For each litre of milk sold, his father gives Chipego 50 ngwee. That doesn't sound like a lot, but if his father sells 24 litres a day, it adds up to quite a bit. Can you tell how much?Chipego saves his money until Saturday when he makes a trip to the book shop. Each book costs less than k10.00, so in a good week, he can buy quite a few.
Chipego also loves to drink Pendo's milk. His father says that milk helps to build strong bones and teeth and makes a person fit and healthy.So by drinking milk and eating lots of vegetables from his father's garden, Chipego is strong and healthy. He seldom gets sick and never goes hungry. His mother loves making mabisi using Pendo's milk too. His young sister enjoys adding the milk to her chibwantu! Hmmm! Yummy!
Chipego never forgets to thank Pendo at the end of each day. He rewards her with extra carrots or spinach leaves that he finds lying around the garden."Thank you Pendo, you are my best friend! It is thanks to you that I am strong, healthy and clever. If not for you I would never be able to buy all the books that help me be top of my class." One day I will be a veterinary  doctor because of you!Pendo is very lucky because Mutinta, Chipego's mother and Father also rewards her! What an amazing cow!
This is Jaaka the fisherman from Naminya.
He fishes on the river Nile.
He has a boat,  fishing net and a hook.
He always wakes up very early in the morning to catch the Nile perch.
At around 10am,  he's selling his catch in Jinja central market.
Jaaka what happened? Was it a loss? He's so sad.
"Today the situation is bad. The Nile breeze did not permit me to fish. And one perch swam away with my hook."
"But I have hope that tomorrow will be good,  because I've bought a new hook."
Long ago,  there was no night in Opio's village. People slept when they were tired and worked when they were awake.
One day Opio went out hunting with his dogs. After a short time,  his dogs started to chase an antelope. Opio followed them. He ran for many hours. Every time he became tired,  he rested. Then he would run again. But he could not find his dogs.
After many days,  he came to a village. He went to one of the houses and said to the owner,  "I have chased an antelope for a long time and I am very tired. I want to rest." The man said,  "Sit down and rest. Would you like some beer?" Opio was very thirsty so he drank some. Then he went to sleep.
When he woke up,  he couldn't see. He opened and closed his eyes many times. "You have given me something very bad to drink," he said to the man. "I can't see properly anymore!" "There is nothing wrong with you," the man replied. "It's night now. Haven't you ever seen night? When the day leaves,  the night comes."
Opio asked many questions about the night. He began to like it very much. He and his new friend talked until morning. He stayed for another day so that he could see the night come again.
The next morning he asked his friend,  "How can I take the night to my own village? I want my people to see the night." The man explained,  "When it starts to get dark this evening,  walk to your village. If you look straight in front,  the night will follow you. If you look back,  the night will go away."
Opio did as he was told. That evening,  he began to walk towards his village. He felt the dark night behind him as he walked. He was tempted to look back,  but he did not.
When he came to his village,  the villagers were afraid. They asked Opio,  "What disease have you brought to us? What is this dark thing following you?" Opio said,  "My friends,  this dark thing is called night. You are afraid and I was afraid,  too."
Opio continued to explain,  "You will learn to like the night. When the light comes we can work and when night comes,  we can rest."
And that is how night came to Opio's village.
Once upon a time, there was a female giant. One day, she was walking near the lake.She met three little girls and asked them, "Who among you is loved by both parents?"
One of the girls said, "My mother loves me most." Another said, "My father loves me most." But the third one said, "I am loved by both parents."
The giant asked the girl loved by both parents to help her carry firewood. So the girl followed the giant.
They walked for some distance. The girl asked the giant, "Where is your firewood?" The giant replied, "It is near those trees over there!"
When they reached the trees, the girl asked again, "Where is your firewood?" The giant answered, "Not far now!"
They met a man along the way. He asked the giant, "What is the name of your child?" The giant replied, "She is called the talking bag."
The girl burst out and sang: I am not called the talking bag. My name is Kaamungei! Oh! My mother, whom I love. Oh! My father, whom I love. Oh! My calabash, which I use to drink milk!
When the man heard what the girl sang, he rescued her and took her back to her parents.The story ends there!
It is dry.
The sun is hot.
It is windy.
It is cloudy.
It is cold.
It is raining.
There is thunder.
I see a rainbow.
Neymar arrived in the capital city of Nigeria. The Nigerians told him to demonstrate the skill of passing the ball using the instep.
From Nigeria,  Neymar moved to Ghana. He demonstrated passing the ball using the inside of his foot. This made the people in Ghana very happy.
While in Ghana,  Neymar received an invitation from South Africa.He went to South Africa to demonstrate trapping the ball using the front of the foot.
From South Africa,  he moved to Chad. In Chad, he demonstrated trapping the ball using the side of the foot.
When Neymar reached DR Congo, he shook the country with his skill trapping the ball using his thigh.
The Ugandans who watched Neymar in the Congo  invited him to demonstrate the skill of tackling.
This news then spread across East Africa. The Kenyans welcomed Neymar to demonstrate punching in goal keeping.
The same week, the Tanzanians called for Neymar to demonstrate the skill of heading in passing the ball.
Neymar moved to Rwanda to demonstrate the skill of passing the ball using the outside of the foot.
After Rwanda,  Neymar concluded his African trip in South Sudan. He demonstrated the skill of punting in goal keeping.
Lynne, Oupa Karel and Anton were getting things ready for Lynne's birthday party.
Anton and Lynne are going to bake a cake. Oupa Karel reads the recipe.
"Let's mix these ingredients in the big bowl," said Lynne.
Anton stirred the ingredients and made a big mess.
"The cake feels heavy now," said Oupa Karel.
"Your friends have arrived," said Oupa Karel.
Anton thought the first present would be heavy because it was big.
It was a pillow and it weighed very little.
Anton thought the next present would be light because it was small.
It was a painted rock and it weighed a lot.
The children said that 1 kilogram of rocks weighs the same as 1 kilogram of feathers.
Lynne's cake was burnt.
Lynne was very sad.
Auntie Mavis asked Anton to guess how much her present weighed.
"It weighs the same as the cake that burned," said Anton.
Everyone said, "happy birthday, Lynne."
Nestled in the Kingdom of the Zulu is a magnificent place called the Valley.
A little girl called Jabulile lives here. Jabulile was always a happy child. She was also curious, and full of questions about life.Everything fascinated her.
Jabulile’s father was a mielie farmer.Her mother was a teacher. They taught her to dream big dreams. Jabulile’s biggest dream was to help people.
One awful day, the clouds began to gather over the Valley. Everything grew dark and grey. An ugly storm swept over the land.
Great gusts of wind blew the roofs off the huts. All the animals lost their homes. It was a very sad day.
The village folk cried, “What shall we do now?”“All the crops are ruined!” cried the farmers. “Our homes are gone!” said the elders. All hope seemed lost. But Jabulile remembered something her wise father once told her.
Jabulile started speaking to the villagers.“The storm only hurts us,” she said, “because of the way we choose to see it. If you look up, the sun is shining again. It is a new day.“After every storm, there must be a rainbow!” she shouted excitedly.
The villagers saw the rainbow and they began to smile. It stood as a promise that the storm was over.
The villagers rebuilt their homes. Farmers planted new crops. The grass grew greener than ever before.
Once again there was hope and happiness in the Valley.
I'm Venus, I live with my mum, dad and older sister. It's our lunch time, there's oats, (yummy!)
There is a big boy who takes care of us with many other dogs, his name is Robin. He takes us for walk, to the vet and more. I am a bloodhound, so whenever he loses things in the fields, I help him!
Many times people come and buy the dogs from Robin and give him a card or some paper, (they call it cash.) He gives them the chosen dog after they pay.
Today a boy and a girl came with their parents to pick a dog. They finally picked me! I was Robin's favourite dog, they couldn't take me! But Robin had to give me, he told them "He's a special dog, take good care of him."
I am now with them for the past few months, they are a great family. I run with them, they feed me and I find their lost things. I still miss Robin, I want to see him. I will hopefully see him again.
My village has goats. It is far from big cities.
Mother said, "Zainab, we have a present for your sixth birthday."
Mother, aunt and I waited for the bus.
I sat on mother’s lap. I slept the whole way.
We reached the market. I saw a beautiful blue helicopter.
One stall had fruits. I asked mother, “Which ones are these?”
Mother said, “These are apples.” I begged, “Please, buy me one.”
I forgot my mother’s hand. I thought only of my apple.
When I finished eating, I was alone. I started to cry.
A woman took me where there were other children.
I thought children were sold at the market. I cried more.
A man asked, "Where is Zainab?"I hid away from him.
My mother's familiar voice called, "Zainab!" I was very happy.
My aunt pulled out a beautiful helicopter. "It's yours!" she said.
One day a very clever baby was born in Gungululu in the Eastern Cape. Her name was Sindiwe Magona. She was the oldest of eight children.
At night, her grandmother told magical stories about ogres and giants, animals of the forests, great beasts, and little creatures of the veld. It was Sindiwe’s favourite time.
Sindiwe loved school and she dreamed about being a teacher.
When Sindiwe became a teenager, her family organised a feast to celebrate. She was given special things to wear and a wise old man sang a praise song to her. (Blessings, long life! May your ancestors guard you!)
Sindiwe trained to be a teacher. She was very excited to teach at her first school. But there weren’t enough schools for black children and they had no desks or books to write in. This made Sindiwe feel scared. How could she be a good teacher when the children had nowhere to sit?
She left the school to work as a cleaner.She worked in four different houses. Sometimes the people there treated her badly and Sindiwe became very unhappy.
All this time Sindiwe studied. Her hard work paid off! She won a scholarship to study at a university in New York. She and her three small children packed their bags and flew across the sea to the United States of America.
In New York, Sindiwe studied to become a social worker. She wanted to help families make their lives better.
When she finished studying, the United Nations gave Sindiwe a job. Most of the countries in the world meet at the United Nations to talk about their problems.
Sindiwe told the world about South Africa, and how hard it was for black people living there. The people at the United Nations loved to listen to Sindiwe’s stories. They wanted to learn more and more about South Africans. Perhaps, together, they could help to change things in South Africa.
She worked at the United Nations for twenty years while her children grew into adults. But Sindiwe missed the country where she was born. She wanted to tell her stories to the people at home.So she packed her luggage, got on a plane and flew back over the sea to Cape Town.
Sindiwe’s love for books and stories have helped her write piles and piles of books. And children and grown-ups love to read her stories. Many people call her Nomabali because she’s always writing, telling and reading stories.
My dinosaur and I look at my birds in the sky.
My birds and I meet Chimpanzee in the tree.
My chimpanzee and I play with my giraffes on the hill.
My giraffes and I make monkey balls from clay.
My monkey and I eat bananas with Gorilla every day.
My gorilla and monkey fear Tortoise in every way.
Tortoise and I go home very slowly with Snake.
Snake and I love to hiss and sing songs by the lake.
My entire family and I live together in great happiness!
Every day when eight-year-old Sisanda gets home from school,  she changes out of her uniform,  eats her lunch and plays a game of umlabalaba with her grandfather. They have so much fun flying their "cows" around the board that she doesn't want to stop. But then he reminds her that she wants to become a bank manager one day when she grows up.
For her last birthday,  Sisanda had a special treat – her parents got permission for her to have a party at the game reserve. The giraffes at the reserve were curious about this group of people. They stretched out their long necks for the best view of the party and they even seemed to want some of the birthday cake! Sisanda loved the giraffes. All animals were special to her,  but it was the quiet and gentle giraffes that stole her heart. She could spend all day watching them.
"Oh no!" said Sisanda starting to cry. "I wish there was something I could do. The baby giraffe must be crying just like me." Sisanda cried and cried. Her mother tried to comfort her. She even read Sisanda an extra story at bedtime to help her forget how sorry she felt for that baby giraffe. Eventually,  Sisanda drifted off to sleep to the sound of her mama's voice.
They found the baby giraffe standing alone. His willowy neck drooped and his big brown eyes looked dull. Sisanda stood as close to him as she could. She opened her small bag and took out a book. Then,  to her parents' surprise,  she began to read to the baby giraffe. He turned his head towards her voice and listened as if he could understand every word. At first,  Sisanda's parents thought reading to a giraffe was a strange thing to do,  but they changed their minds when they saw how peaceful he looked − his gentle eyes looking at Sisanda.
On the day of the outing,  forty Grade 3 children waited eagerly for the reserve gates to open. Then Sisanda proudly led everyone to Thokozani. Some of the children looked at the tall giraffe in amazement. Others giggled nervously. Their teacher,  Miss Khanyile,  just smiled.
Aisha is chuckling because she heard a funny story.She is smiling.What is Aisha feeling?
Isah is feeling grumpy. He has a scowl on his face.Why is he irritated?
Yuadoo is scared of the dark.Everyone feels fear sometimes. But Yuadoo can ask for help.
Chidubem is worried about his school work. He can tell his teacher.He can ask for help.
Lushan is playing around!It's okay to be silly sometimes.
Eruro is feeling sad. It's okay to cry.Emotions come and go.
Ayator is bursting with happiness.He is joyful.Emotions come and go.
Hadiza is bored.She needs to find something to do.
Ayo is angry.He is frustrated.Anger is a difficult feeling.
Labake is excited. What's the cause of her excitement?Mother made her favourite food.
Zege felt sleepy.He was very tired."But wait, is 'sleepy' an emotion?" asks Efe.
Efe is confused!Can you answer his question?
Tega is feeling surprise and shock.He heard some gossip.Is it true?
Yebo is sick.She feels miserable.She needs some medicine and rest to feel better.
Sekyen is feeling content.She has finished her chores.Now she can play.
Bello does not have chores today.He shows two thumbs up to Sekyen."Good job, now let's play!" he says.
Early one morning Vusi's granny called him, "Vusi,  please take this egg to your parents. They want to make a large cake for your sister's wedding."
On his way to his parents, Vusi met two boys picking fruit. One boy grabbed the egg from Vusi and shot it at a tree. The egg broke.
"What have you done?" cried Vusi. "That egg was for a cake. The cake was for my sister's wedding. What will my sister say if there is no wedding cake?"
The boys were sorry for teasing Vusi. "We can't help with the cake, but here is a walking stick for your sister," said one. Vusi continued on his journey.
Along the way he met two men building a house. "Can we use that strong stick?" asked one. But the stick was not strong enough for building, and it broke.
"What have you done?" cried Vusi. "That stick was a gift for my sister. The fruit pickers gave me the stick because they broke the egg for the cake. The cake was for my sister's wedding. Now there is no egg, no cake, and no gift. What will my sister say?"
The builders were sorry for breaking the stick. "We can't help with the cake, but here is some thatch for your sister," said one. And so Vusi continued on his journey.
Along the way, Vusi met a farmer and a cow. "What delicious thatch, can I have a nibble?" asked the cow. But the thatch was so tasty that the cow ate it all!
"What have you done?" cried Vusi. "That thatch was a gift for my sister. The builders gave me the thatch because they broke the stick from the fruit pickers. The fruit pickers gave me the stick because they broke the egg for my sister's cake. The cake was for my sister's wedding. Now there is no egg, no cake, and no gift. What will my sister say?"
The cow was sorry she was greedy. The farmer agreed that the cow could go with Vusi as a gift for his sister. And so Vusi carried on.
But the cow ran back to the farmer at supper time.  Vusi got lost on his journey. He arrived very late for his sister's wedding. The guests were already eating.
"What shall I do?" cried Vusi. "The cow that ran away was a gift, in return for the thatch the builders gave me. The builders gave me the thatch because they broke the stick from the fruit pickers. The fruit pickers gave me the stick because they broke the egg for the cake. The cake was for the wedding. Now there is no egg, no cake, and no gift."
Vusi's sister thought for a while, then she said, "Vusi my brother, I don't really care about gifts. I don't even care about the cake! We are all here together, I am happy. Now put on your smart clothes and let's celebrate this day!" And so, that's what Vusi did.
Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.
The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.
Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find the right man.
Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. This herb would heal her father's wound. But the lake was filled with dangerous spirits.
Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. Some men did not return from the lake at all.
Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" But Nangila had made up her mind.
On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."
When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.
Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived into the lake. She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.
When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She was afraid, but she sang the song the old woman taught her: I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here, in the land where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers.
Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.
Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. The entire village danced and praised Nangila.
It happened one year that the rain didn't fall. The trees dried up and died. The rivers disappeared and the water evaporated. People and animals were dying from hunger and thirst.
The chief animals met to talk about the situation. Lion said, "Let's call everyone together and discuss the idea of digging a well. We can drink from its waters."Elephant agreed and went off to spread the news to the other animals.
All the animals gathered to discuss the situation. Lion began, saying, "My brothers and sisters, this year the rain has not fallen. Everyone is dying from hunger and thirst. Let us dig a well so that we can all drink from it."
The animals all agreed and immediately grabbed hoes, shovels and picks. They started digging a well.
Hare had not come, but the other animals continued without him. They dug. And they dug. And they dug some more. And finally they hit water. When they struck water, Lion said, "Why did Hare not come to help? He will not drink from this water!"
Later Hare came and saw the well. He said, "Hello?" But he heard nothing. So he went in and splashed around in the water for a while.
The next day, when the animals came, they saw that their well was a big mess. The water was nothing but mud. They asked, "Who would do such a thing?" Someone said, "I bet it was Hare, because when we were digging the well he was nowhere to be found."
The animals decided to leave a guard at the well. They chose Baboon to keep an eye on things. Hare came to the well that night, and said, "Hello?" And Baboon replied, "Hello!" So Hare came over to Baboon, saying "Try this!" Hare gave Baboon some honey. And Baboon let him take some water. Just then, Hyena arrived and saw Hare drinking.
The next day, Hyena went and told all the animals that Hare had taken water from the well. They chose Turtle to guard the well. Turtle was on the job when Hare arrived at night, saying, "Hello?" He didn't hear a sound.He started talking to himself, "Lucky me! I've come to have a little drink."
When Turtle had arrived at the well, she had hidden herself among the rocks. She looked just like another rock. As soon as Hare started to go into the water, Turtle grabbed Hare by the leg. Hare said, "Oops, you didn't grab me. You've grabbed a stick!" But Turtle didn't say a word. She stayed there holding onto Hare until the sunrise.
When Lion arrived, he saw that Turtle had captured Hare. He called the rest of the animals to decide what to do with Hare. When all the animals were assembled, Lion asked them, "What shall we do with Hare?"Turtle said, "I want Elephant to grab him with her trunk and beat him on rocks." All the other animals agreed.
Hare quickly said, "O Great Lion, you know that hares don't die if you hit them on rocks. A hare will only die if he is thrown into ashes."So, Lion told Elephant to grab Hare. Elephant picked him up and started hitting him in a pile of ash from a fire.
After Hare was completely covered in ashes, Elephant threw him. As Hare landed he made a big cloud of dust! When the animals saw the dust they really laughed.
When the dust settled, the animals looked around and Hare was gone! And then they knew that Hare had tricked them again.
An apple fell from a tree under which Rabbit was sleeping.
Rabbit heard a voice say, “Run Rabbit run!”
Rabbit told Chicken, “Something fell and I heard, ‘Run Rabbit run!'”
Chicken started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They told Dog, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Dog started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
Dog told Horse, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Horse started to run with the others.
Donkey asked, “Why are you running?” Horse replied, “I don’t know.”
Donkey started running with them.
Donkey told Cow, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Cow was worried and started to run as well.
Cow told Cat, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Cat started running with the other animals.
They met a boy. “Don’t you know what happened?” he asked.
“It was me who said, ‘Run Rabbit run!’” laughed the boy.
There was once a girl called Chikondi who lived with her parents near the village of Chionda. One day Chikondi's mother sent her to fetch water at the well.
On the way,  she met her friends. They were going to the forest to get firewood. Chikondi wanted to go with them. "Please wait for me under this  masuku tree!" she said,  "I have to fetch water for my mother." But her friends didn't want to wait.
"All right,  I'll catch up with you in the forest!" said Chikondi She ran off to fetch water and take it to her mother. Then she went to the forest to look for her friends.
She followed a path that led to a stream. On the other side of the stream were many tiny paths each one,  leading in a different direction. "Which path had her friends taken?" she wondered.
She chose the biggest path,  and walked and walked,  but she could not find her friends. She was so tired that when she sat under a tree to rest,  she fell fast asleep.
When Chikondi woke up,  it was dark. In the darkness,  yellow eyes were gleaming. She was surrounded by hyenas! She was too terrified even to cry out. She tried running,  but the hyenas circled her hungrily.
"Don't move," said the gruff voice of the biggest hyena. "If you run,  we'll eat you!" "Please let me go home!" Chikonde pleaded.
But instead the hyenas took Chikondi to their house in the forest. It was a dirty hut full of bones and buzzing flies. She lay down and pretended to go to sleep.
In the darkness,  she heard the hyenas talking to each other. "How is the fire doing?" one hyena asked. "Is the water boiling?" "Everything is ready," was the reply. "Should I bring her?" "Yes,  yes!" growled the other hyenas. "We're hungry!" They were ready to drag Chikondi out of the hut.
But the big hyena spoke,  "Hyenas,  wait. Remember the rule of the village. No hyena may eat alone. We have to invite the whole family to share a meal." "I'll go and call the in-laws," said his wife. "I'll go and fetch my cousins," said the small hyena. "I'll fetch our brothers and sisters," said another. "And I will remain here with our food," said the big hyena.
The big hyena sat in the doorway of the hut and the others went off in different directions. They took a long time,  and the big hyena began to doze in front of the warm fire. Soon he was snoring. This was Chikondi's chance! But how was she going to get past the hyena? He was so big he filled the whole doorway.
There was only one way. She took a flying leap right over the hyena's back,  and ran as fast as her legs could carry her.
Just then the other hyenas returned,  and saw what had happened. They ran after her,  howling with anger and disappointment. But it was too late.
As she came to her village,  one of the villagers recognised her and shouted,  "Chikondi,  "Chikondi is coming,  "Chikondi is coming." Her father and mother ran out to meet her. They hugged her,  while thanking God for saving their child,  ""Chikondi,  "Chikondi  we thought you had died!"
From that day,  "Chikondi and the other children never again went back to the forest alone.
In a country called Gabon,  a little village stood at the very edge of a forest. In the heart of this forest,  in the highest branches of an enormous tree,  lived a very special bird − the bird that made rain.
For as far back as the villagers could remember,  they had taken the time to keep this bird happy. They saved scraps of bread,  pieces of fruit and fresh coconut milk,  and every week or two a group of villagers took these delicacies into the forest. When they had laid them at the base of the tree,  one of them played a simple tune on the thumb piano.
After a while,  the bird flew down to the ground to eat and drink. When she had finished,  she began to sing the most beautiful song.   At the same time,  she raised her dark,  shiny blue wings,  and within minutes,  the rain began to fall.
This went on for many years. Because the rain fell regularly,  the crops grew abundantly and there was plenty of food in the village.   But gradually things began to change. Somehow,  the villagers were always busy and they began to neglect the rain bird. "It will rain anyway," they said. "It's time to stop spoiling that silly old bird!"
But the people were wrong. When they stopped looking after the bird,  the rain stopped falling. The crops began to dry up and die,  and the animals grew thin and weak. Still,  nobody in the village went into the forest to feed the bird that brought the rain. Now they were all too busy trying to find money to buy food in the neighbouring town.
One scorching day,  a young girl called Ketti decided to go into the forest after school. "At least it will be cool in there," she thought. She walked and walked,  and after some time,  she came to the tall tree in which the rain bird lived. Ketti stared up at the tree. Suddenly,  she remembered how her granny had taken her into the forest to feed the bird when she was still a tiny child. Ketti opened her school bag and pulled out a piece of bread left over from her lunch. Carefully she laid the bread at the base of the tree. Then because she had no thumb piano, she sang an old song that she had known all her life.
With a loud whooshing sound,  a beautiful blue bird swooped out of the branches above Ketti's head and began to eat the bread. When the bird had finished,  she opened her mouth and sang a few pure,  high notes. Then she raised her shiny wings and all of a sudden Ketti heard the rumble of thunder. By the time she reached her home,  giant rain drops were pelting down,  cooling the baking red earth.
Ketti was very happy,  until she told her parents what had happened. "Don't be silly!" scolded her mother. "Nobody believes that bird has anything to do with the rain anymore!" "Your mother is right," said Ketti's father. "The drought has been broken now and we will be fine. Don't go wasting good bread feeding that greedy old bird again!"   Though Ketti didn't argue with her parents,  she felt sure they were wrong. "If only Granny were still alive," she said to herself,  "she would have believed me!" But Ketti's granny had died a few years earlier. The only thing Ketti had left,  was her granny's old thumb piano.
Two weeks passed and there was no more rain. The crops began to shrivel up again and the hungry animals' ribs began to stick out even more. The sun beat down mercilessly from a glaring blue sky.   "I don't care what they say!" thought Ketti. "We need rain. I'm going to feed the bird again tomorrow!"
So,  early the next morning,  after taking a slice of bread and a handful of red berries from the kitchen,  Ketti slipped out of the house. She began to make her way to the centre of the forest.   What she didn't realise,  was that her father was also awake. When he saw what his daughter was doing,  he realised that she was going to feed the rain bird again.
"I'll teach that  child a lesson!" he said to himself angrily. He snatched his bow and arrows and silently followed Ketti into the forest. Just as the bird flew down to eat the food that Ketti had set out for it,  her father raised his bow and released his deadly arrow. The arrow flew straight into the bird's heart. The bird let out a piercing shriek. Terrified,  Ketti spun around − just in time to see her father fall down,  stone dead. Ketti screamed and turned around − just in time to see the arrow fall harmlessly from the bird's glossy body. Then the bird,  unharmed, swooped up into the highest branch of the tree.
Ketti raced out of the forest to a scene of utter devastation. Every animal and every person she saw lay dead on the ground. With a pounding heart,  she ran all the way back to her home.  She quickly found her granny's old thumb piano. "This is my only hope!" she thought. "The rain bird is angry. I have to make her happy again! I HAVE to!"
Half an hour later,  Ketti was back at the base of the big tree. Her body was drenched with sweat and she was gasping for breath. A few paces away from her lay the lifeless body of her father. Ketti looked away quickly,  and with trembling hands,  began to play the thumb piano. She played and played,  until her fingers hurt.
Finally,  what she wanted most in the world happened. Down swooped the bird as if nothing had happened. The bird ate some of the berries still lying on the ground and sang a few notes. Then,  as Ketti played on,  the bird raised her wings. Ketti heard a rustle behind her.
It was her father who had woken up! "I'm sorry!" he said again and again to the big, blue bird. Then he held out his hand to his daughter and they walked slowly back to the village. In the village all the people and animals were alive again.
That night the villagers held a meeting.They all agreed that they had learned a valuable lesson. And from that day onwards,  not one week passed without a special trip to the forest to feed the bird that brought the rain.
I use my feet to run, jump, and kick.
I use my hands to eat, work, and hug.
But the head is more important than feet or hands.
The head has the eyes. I see with my eyes.
The head has the nose. I smell with my nose.
The head has the ears. I hear with my ears.
The head has the tongue. I taste salty and sweet.
The head has the mouth. I speak with my mouth.
The head controls the whole body!
I peel the potatoes.
I chop a cabbage.
I grate the carrots.
I wash the beans.
I cut the butternut.
I chop the spinach.
My mom chops the onions.
Onions make me cry when they are chopped.
This is a manyatta. It is my home. My home is in Turkana County.
This is a camel. In Turkana County, people keep many different animals. The camel is the most important animal for my community.
These are my teachers. I like going to school. I like my Art teacher very much.
This is a ship. Ships are big. They are used to transport people and goods on water. If I go to Mombasa, I can see a ship.
This is a bed. I like the bed that my father made for me. I share it with my younger brother. It is comfortable.
This is a cock. At home, we have two cocks. We also have many hens. The hens lay many eggs.
This is a mouse. Mice are dangerous animals. They eat food. They can cause disease.They can destroy clothes.
This is a dog. Dogs are domestic animals. Our dog is called Daa. He barks a lot.
This is an umbrella. My parents have a big umbrella. It has red, blue, orange and green colours. When it rains, we use an umbrella so we do not get wet.
I am in class two and I know many things. I want to know many more. What I do not know, I ask my parents or my teacher.
Mzi lives in a thatched house.
Thulani lives in a square house.
This house is a rectangle.
The roof of this house is a triangle.
This man is building his own house.
This house is new.
This house is old.
I wish I lived in this house.
Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.
The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.
Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find theright man.
Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. This herb would healher father's wound. Butthe lake was filled with dangerous spirits.
Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. Some men did not return from the lake at all.
Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" But Nangila had made up her mind.
On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."
When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.
Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived intothe lake. She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.
When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She was afraid, but she sang the song the old woman taught her, "I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here, in the land where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers."
Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.
Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. The entire village danced and praised Nangila.
This is my teacher.Her name is Teacher Akinyi.She loves us a lot.
Teacher Akinyi teaches us the alphabet. She teaches us the vowels. I can say the letters a,  e,  i,  o,  u.
Teacher Akinyi teaches us colours. I know red,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and black.
During nap time,  Teacher Akinyi sings us to sleep. She sings a lullaby to us.
On Monday,  she tells us stories about great men.
On Tuesday,  she tells us stories about great women.
On Wednesday,  she tells us stories about means of transport.
On Thursday,  she tells us stories about farming.
And on Friday,  we tell our own stories to the class.
Our teacher is the best teacher in the world! When I grow up,  I want to be like Teacher Akinyi.
Eyes
Ears
Mouth
Nose
Chin
Teeth
Tongue
Cheeks
Eyebrows
Hair
When we go walking and the road is long, we’ll walk together singing a song.
I am with you and you are with me. A journey is fun with our family.
I’ll keep you cosy like a mother hen. She keeps her chicks warm under her wing.
If the rain starts to fall down from the sky, like that good hat I’ll keep your face dry.
If storm clouds get angry and grumble and moan, be brave, why cry? You’re not alone.
We’re walking together so we never get bored. Look up! Look around! See where we’ve explored!
If you see something that’s funny to see, I don’t want to miss it. Please share it with me!
If your feet start to hurt from the distance we’ve passed, don’t worry, we’ve made it! Here’s the clinic at last.
We all need to check our throat, lungs and ears. Get strong as you grow, it’s no reason for tears.
Do you think it’s scary? Here, hold my hand. She’ll check your blood pressure with this clever armband.
They give us our medicine, tell us what we should know, to keep us all healthy. Now back home we go.
It’s okay to be tired, there’s so much we’ve seen. Now it’s your bedtime. Sleep well and sweet dreams.
I'm Maria.
This is my mother.
This is the baby.
This is my father.
This is my brother.
This is my sister.
This is my grandmother.
This is my grandfather.
This is my uncle.
This is my aunt.
This is my family.
Goat was king of animals and birds. He called a meeting.
Goat told them that he had a dream. They all listened.
The dream was about hunger. "What shall we do?" asked Cat.
Hen and Duck said, "Let's keep food in the king's store."
King Goat said, "Tie up anyone who does not obey."
The time came to choose a new king. They chose Cat.
Goat did not want Cat as king. "I am the king," Goat said angrily.
Goat did not take food. Cow asked, "What shall we do?"
The animals and birds talked together. They were angry with Goat.
Dog said, "I was always with him when he was king."
Sheep said, "I gave his children my beautiful wool when he was king."
Pig cried, "When he was king, I looked after his garden."
"Did Goat think he will be king forever?" Sheep  asked.
The animals agreed that Goat must take food to king Cat.
The animals found Goat relaxing. Goat said, "I will always be king."
"We will tie you and take you to the new king."
Cow pulled Goat to the king's court. Others cheered.
That's why goats refuse to move when they are pulled.
Long, long ago there were seven suns in the sky. Their rays made the earth so hot that human beings could not bear it.
So, the seven brothers belonging to a tribe called the Munda decided to kill the suns. They shot arrows at them and were able to kill six of the suns.
The seventh sun hid behind a hill.
Now, with the suns gone, there was darkness everywhere. The deer could not see the tigers. The elephants bumped into trees. The rabbits walked over the lions and there was confusion all around.
To find a solution, the animals decided to have a meeting. A rabbit told them about one of the seven suns who was still alive and hiding behind a hill. But who would be the best one to call back the sun?
"I will call out to the sun," said the lion, for he was the king of the forest. "Sun, sun, please do not run away. Come back and shine on us," roared the lion. But the sun did not listen to him.
The elephant called out next. He raised his trunk and trumpeted, "Sun, sun, please come back." But the sun did not listen to him.
The peacock danced and pleaded, "Sun, sun, please come back." But the sun refused to come out. One after the other, all the animals called out to the sun. But he did not listen to any of them. Finally, a rooster offered to call the sun. Everybody laughed.
The lion said, "The rooster should be allowed to try." Rooster stepped forward and gently crowed,  "Kookoodokoo, koo." To everyone's surprise, the sun peeped out a little from behind the hill.
The rooster crowed again, this time more boldly, "KookoodoKOO-KOO." The sun came up a little higher. The rooster crowed a third time, even louder and bolder, "KOOKOODOKOO-KOO." The sun rose high and bright. There was light everywhere. The animals were delighted and the humans felt relieved.
Ever since that day, when the rooster crows in the morning, the sun rises and shines in the sky.
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
A crocodile has sharp teeth.
A lion also has sharp teeth.
A shark has very sharp teeth!
A cow has strong teeth for grinding food.
A bird does not have teeth. How does it eat?
Rats have long front teeth.
I used to have front teeth.
My front teeth fell out!
Tamara was a five-year-old girl who lived with her family. Their village was near a forest that had wild animals.
Tamara was obedient to her parents. She looked after sheep and goats.
Tamara loved listening to birds singing as she took care of the animals. As the birds sang, she put her own words to the tune.
Tamara was too young for school. Her parents only allowed their older children, Nashipae and Tasieku, to go to school. It was 10 kilometres away.
Nashipae and Tasieku went with other children from the village in the morning and returned in the evening. They carried food in small containers.
Tamara asked her mother, "When will I go to school?" Her mother answered, "You will go soon, my dear child."
One day, a car arrived with the chief and two ladies. The chief made sure that children went to school at the right age.
People believed that if a child was able to stretch her hand over her head and touch the ear, she was ready to start school.
The chief asked, "How old are you?" Tamara replied, "I am five years old." "Let's see if you can go to school," the chief said.
One of the ladies took Tamara's right arm and gently placed it over her head. Tamara touched her left ear.
Tamara would go to a different school than Nashipae and Tasieku. It was new and closer to home.
Tamara was very happy. She thought, "I will read and write like Nashipae and Tasieku."
Once upon a time Eagle and Hen were best friends. The two of them were together and chatted from morning till dusk. Eagle's chickens couldn't wait to visit Hen's chickens and play with them.
One day Hen approached Eagle. “My friend,” she said. “I have to ask you a big favour. Rooster's pyjama pants are torn. He is really grumpy about it. They are his favourite pants. I want to mend the pants, but I don't have a needle. May I borrow your needle?” Eagle nodded. “Of course, dear friend,” she said. “But please take good care of it. It is an heirloom needle. My grandmother gave it to me.” “Of course, my friend,” Hen said. She took the shining needle. “I'll return it tomorrow.”
Hen went away to mend her husband's pants. The next morning, as usual, Hen was on her way to Eagle. But oh, goodness – the needle was gone! Hen anxiously called her little chicks together. “Has anyone seen Eagle's needle?” she asked. “No, Mommy,” the chickens cheeped. “Help me look for it,” Hen said.
Hen and her chickens looked everywhere. In every bush. Behind every lump of grass. Inside all their nests. But Eagle's needle was gone.
Eagle waited the whole day for Hen to come and visit. By dusk she was getting annoyed. She flew to the farm yard. “Good evening, friend,” she greeted Hen. “Why didn't you visit me today?” “I I was very busy,” Hen said.
“And where is the needle you borrowed from me?” Eagle asked.” “Hen swallowed.” “Oh, Eagle I am so sorry. I lost your needle.” “Lost it?" Eagle was angry. “Don't worry,” Hen said quickly. “My chickens and I will find it.” It must be here somewhere.
Eagle was very angry. “I can't believe you lost my needle,” she said. “The needle I got from my grandma. You'd better look for it. If you haven't found it by tomorrow, I will come and grab one of your chickens.” The following morning Rooster had barely started crowing when Hen called on her chicks. “Kids, you must help me look for it,” she said. “We'll scratch around this whole farm yard. Eagle's needle must be here.”
Look carefully when you see Hen and her chickens again. Up until this day they are still scratching around in the dust, looking for Eagle's needle. And when Hen notices an eagle flying in the air, she anxiously clucks: “Quick, little chicks. Hide beneath my wings. If Eagle sees you, she will catch you. She is still annoyed about her grandmother's needle.”
A long time ago,  in the vast city of Johannesburg,  a baby girl was born. That baby was me. My mom called me Miriam. Miriam Makeba.
Mom was a sangoma,  but she also worked to make other people's homes neat and clean. It was hard for my mom to earn enough for both of us. She started selling homemade beer to bring in more money.
The laws of the land said that selling homemade beer was wrong. The police sent my mom to jail for six long months. I was only 18 days old,  and needed my mom. So even though I was just a baby,  I went to jail too.
As a little girl I loved to sing. When I was older,  I helped my mom clean houses. Singing songs as I worked made the chores go faster and the days seem brighter. Singing made me happier than I can explain.
I sang in my church,  and this made others happy too. Music has the power to bring people together. When we were singing we felt brave and strong.
People said my voice was a gift and my songs were special. I sang with other musicians and our music was heard all over the world.
My home was Sophiatown,  a place of culture and music. Sophiatown,  a place where South Africans could make music in harmony and dance together. But the people who ruled the land at the time did not like this togetherness. Those rulers didn't want black and white people to be friends.
I knew it was wrong to treat people differently because of their skin colour. I did not hide my beliefs,  and so those people in charge wanted me out of the country. When I was singing in America,  I was told I could never return home.
People all over the world heard my story. My songs and my story helped many to see how there was no fairness in South Africa for those with black skin. I decided to go on singing and telling the truth about my country,  no matter what.
The world loved my music and I was welcomed in many countries. I won awards and sang for important people all over the globe. My life was good,  but something was missing. I could not sing in my home country,  and people there were not free.
Then a wonderful day dawned when Nelson Mandela became president of South Africa. New people were in charge and the unfair laws belonged to the past. I finally went home with new hope in my heart.
After that I could sing in a free,  fair country. People of different skin colours could enjoy music together. I helped make this happen because I was brave and strong. I sang the truth in all of my songs.
I can run with it.
I can jump with it.
I can dance with it.
I can swim with it.
I can skip with it.
I can kick with it.
I can escape with it.
But I can never fly with it.
A long time ago,  three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly,  they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home,  Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But,  she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise,  a dog opened the door and said,  "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said,  "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said,  "Make the bed for me!" Nozibele answered,  "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed,  or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said,  "Nozibele,  today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house,  cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone,  Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed,  one behind the door,  and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back,  he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele,  where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here,  under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here,  behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here,  in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
My mother planted. She planted a small garden. She planted a small garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a small garden. He planted a small garden of flowers.
My mother weeded in both gardens.
My father watered in both gardens.
My parents and I worked in the small gardens. My sister and I harvested the flowers and peas.
The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.
My mother planted. She planted a large garden. She planted a large garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a large garden. He planted a large garden of flowers.
"Yippee!" Zonke shouts when the school bell rings. At last he can go home. This afternoon he wants to play soccer with the other boys. "Hey! Look out," a voice suddenly rings out in front of him. He never noticed Bheka. Bheka growls at him.
"Sorry," Zonke quickly replies. He wants to walk around Bheka. But Bheka suddenly pushes him. Zonke stumbles. Bheka laughs. "Do you have big feet that you fall so easily?" he mocks. Annoyed Zonke straightens himself. A girl,  Thandi,  helps him."Thank you," Zonke says. "You're welcome," Thandi says. "I saw everything. Bheka really is a bully."
Zonke runs home. It's quite hot. Fortunately the house isn't far. Suddenly he notices something in the road. He stops. What is it? It is as big as the palm of his hand. It is brown. And it is made from leather.
It's a wallet! Zonke can't believe his luck. He quickly glances inside the wallet. Wow,  it contains money!
Zonke's heart beats faster. Then he puts the wallet in his pocket. He quickly glances around to see if someone noticed. Yes! Somebody is approaching. It's Bheka. He is only a few steps behind Zonke.
Zonke hurries on. He hopes Bheka hasn't seen him. He doesn't want to glance over his shoulder again. The wallet lies safely in his pocket. When he gets home he will take it out and see how much money it contains.
At home Zonke puts down his school case. Then he walks to the shady tree next to the house. Carefully he takes the wallet from his pocket. His heart beats faster. He counts the notes. Fifty one hundred a hundred and fifty two hundred Rand! He is mega rich. But then he hears a familiar voice. "What are you hiding?" It is Bheka!
Zonke hides the wallet behind his back. "Too late. I saw you picking something up," Bheka says. "That's why I came to check you out." Bheka pulls Zonke's arm. His eyes grow wide when he sees the wallet. He takes it. "Wow! This is nice. Are you going to keep it?" Bheka asks.
"I I don't know yet," Zonke stammers. Bheka also counts the money. "You know the saying: finders keepers." Bheka whistles. "You must surely keep it. If I picked it up,  I would keep it." "But somebody lost it," Zonke says. Bheka laughs. "So what? They were careless. That's why it's your money now."
"I will have to think about it," Zonke says. "You don't have to think about it," Bheka says. "I'll tell you what to do. KEEP THE MONEY. Buy yourself a new pair of shoes. Or a soccer ball." "No!" a girl's voice sounds. It is Thandi from school. "Zonke,  the money doesn't belong to you. You don't have the right to keep it."
"What do you know,  Thandi?" Bheka asks. He pulls a face. "You're just trying to be miss smarty pants. Zonke doesn't have to return the money." Zonke listens to the two of them. He doesn't know what to do. He would like to keep the money. But Thandi may be right. You can't take things that don't belong to you. Even if you pick them up. Bheka suddenly stands right in front of him. Bheka folds his arms. "So,  what are you going to do,  Zonke? Will you keep the money? Or will you try to find the owner?" Zonke thinks and thinks.
"I'm going to return it," Zonke suddenly says loudly. Thandi smiles. "That's the right thing to do. You'll see." Bheka shakes his head. He returns the wallet to Zonke. "You're a coward," he says and leaves. "You're not," Thandi tells Zonke softly. "If you keep the purse you will be as ugly as Bheka himself." Zonke smiles. He is glad she has helped him make the right decision. "How are we going to find out whose money it is?" he asks.
Thandi looks inside the wallet. She takes out a bank card. Gugu Dube is written on the card. The name sounds familiar to Zonke. Thandi removes something else from the wallet. It's a small picture of Gugu and her children. Now Zonke recognises her. "She lives nearby. Come along. We're going to return her wallet."
Together Zonke and Thandi run along the gravel road. Auntie Gugu's door is open. They knock. In a moment someone comes to the door. It's auntie Gugu. Shame,  she seems to be crying.
Zonke feels bad that auntie Gugu is crying. But then he takes the wallet from his pocket. Auntie Gugu's sad face immediately turns happy. She laughs. "My wallet!" she shouts. "I can't believe it." She checks the money in the wallet. "And all the money is here. I am so happy. I had to go and buy some food. But then I lost my wallet. I thought we would go hungry this week." She gives both Zonke and Thandi a kiss on the forehead. Then she danced around with joy.
Chanri and Boipelo are going on an adventure around South Africa. Their journey starts in Kimberley, in the Northern Cape. In Kimberley you will find the Big Hole!
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they travel to Cape Town in the Western Cape. Chanri and Boipelo pick juicy grapes at the farms.
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, then they head off to Bhisho, in the Eastern Cape. The two friends have fun at the Elephant Park!
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they pass through the Free State. They admire all the pretty roses blooming in Bloemfontein.
On to Mahikeng, in the North West. The train slows down to meet Rina the rhino at the National Park. Then our friends speed on to Polokwane, in Limpopo.
Toot-toot toot-toot! They're running late, so the train doesn't stop in Johannesburg, Gauteng. From the train they see many cars and people in this busy city of gold.
Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they travel to Emalahleni, in Mpumalanga. They visit a big coal factory to get fuel for their train.
Chanri and Boipelo end their train journey in Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal. They share sweet bananas with their friends, and talk about their adventure around the country. Do you remember the provinces and their cities?
This is Ndalo.
Ndalo likes to read books.
This is Pendo.
Pendo likes to eat carrots.
Ndalo grazes Pendo after school.
He gives fresh water to Pendo.
Father gives grain to Pendo.
He milks Pendo every day.
Pendo gives a lot of milk.
Father sells Pendo's milk.
Ndalo drinks fresh milk every day.
He says, "Thank you Pendo!"
Once upon a time, Sly Jackal woke up early in the morning. He was very hungry. His tummy gave a big growl. GRRrrrrr! He jumped up and went searching for food.
He wandered around the forest for hours without getting any food. The sun was very hot. Sly Jackal could barely see in front of him. All he could think of was his hunger pangs.
"Aaauuuu!" Sly Jackal let out a loud scream. He fell into a well right in front of him. He was so hungry that he did not spot it.
"Oh my hat!" he thought. "I have to get out of this well. I will die of hunger."
Sly Jackal screamed and shouted, "Help! Anyone help!" Donkey was grazing a few metres away from the well. Donkey heard Sly Jackal's desperate cry. He came rushing.
"What is the matter?" Donkey was very worried. "The water in this well is cool and sweet. I am bored swimming alone. I need someone to help me swim. Please will you join me?"
"The sun is very hot," said Donkey. "I can't swim very well though." "Jump in! I will help you come out of the well," promised the Sly Jackal.
Donkey jumped into the well. The water was so cool. He was free from the heat. Before he knew it, the jackal had jumped on his back and out of the well. Sly Jackal laughed and ran away. Donkey was trapped in the well. He started screaming and shouting, "Help! Anyone help!"
When Asiimwe was still young, her mother loved her very much. She used to make her sleep on a good mat.
This mat was special. It was made of palm leaves in different colours.
The land around Asiimwe's home was dry and hot.There were many snakes, spiders and scorpions, but they didn't harm her.
According to her mother, Asiimwe's mat protected her.
Asiimwe started going to the local well. She also knew her grandmother's home and loved visiting her.
By bad luck, one day Asiimwe got lost on her way to her grandmother's home.
She sat down under a musisa tree and waited for help. While waiting, she fell asleep.
She started dreaming of a woman who looked like her grandmother. She was very happy.
When she woke up, she saw a bird and heard it calling her, "Asiimwe, Asiimwe, wake up and go home."
The bird flew while dropping a piece of mat that looked like Asiimwe's mat. Asiimwe followed the bird.
The bird led Asiimwe safely back home. Her family celebrated her return.
One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi’s cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”Her stomach growled when the baby’s powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life.
One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter.What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.
Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong.Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed.She taught them to sing: “Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers.He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, “You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back.”Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi’s broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers.How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father’s face.
On her sixth birthday she went to school. “You must choose an English name,” said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. “Why do I need a new name?” she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: “Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna.” What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn’t mess with.When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, “You have a big job, my blessing.”At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.
Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride.Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, “You must apply, my clever friend.” “What is the prize?” asked Albertina, growing curious.“A scholarship to high school!” said Betty. “You must apply. You’ll win it, for sure.”
Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.The test began. Albertina’s fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. “Well done, Albertina!” said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. “Well done to Albertina for full marks,” he said, “but you are too old. The scholarship goes to…”Albertina tried not to cry. “That’s unfair,” shouted Betty, hopping with fury. “That wasn’t in the rules!” How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home.The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn’t like the story one bit either.
Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached.She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse’s silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground.
School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty’s back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons.In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? “But nuns earn no salary,” said Father Bernard. “Perhaps you should become a nurse? You’ll be paid while you study.”
Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse.Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.
Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina’s eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children.Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men’s Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina’s long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation.Max had his mother’s black button eyes and his father’s round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. “How rude you are!” she said, “trampling mud inside my home.”In the morning Albertina’s favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover.She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police.
She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, “Wathint’ abafazi; wathint’ imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!”Many hard years followed after Walter’s arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
It had been raining for days, and everyone was grumpy. Everyone except Sizwe, who woke up with a smile every morning. "Yoh! Sizwe! That smile is magic!" said Gogo. "Is it for me?" Sizwe clapped his hand over his mouth. "But it's MY smile, Gogo," he whispered.
His mother laughed. "Sizwe! A smile is something you can give away without losing it. Look!" She lifted him up to the mirror. There was his smile, just as bright as before.
It was time to go out. Mama buttoned up Sizwe's raincoat, and off they went, through the rain,  to the library. Down the street, Sizwe's best friend Zanele stood at the window of her house,  looking sadly at the rain. Sizwe felt his smile creeping, creeping up. Before he knew it, his smile LEAPT out, and flew across the garden to Zanele.
Zanele held on tightly to the smile – it was far too precious to let it get away. As Sizwe walked away to the library, Zanele's doorbell rang. It was the postman, with a letter from her favourite cousin. Zanele was so happy, that the smile bounced up,  and beamed out at the postman. "Thank you,  Mister Postman!" she said.
Zanele's smile was the brightest thing the postman had seen all morning. It kept him warm as he trudged off through the rain. He came to a big house. Inside the gate, a dog was spinning around in circles, barking, barking, barking. He was so silly,  that the postman couldn't help smiling. The smile bounced through the gate with a glitter of glee.
The dog stopped barking. He pricked up his ears and wagged his tail. Then he turned and ran back to the house with the precious, warm smile. A bent old man opened the door. "Oh,  no! You can't come inside. You're all wet!" he told the dog. But right away, the smile beamed up at the old man.
The old man stood a little straighter. "Eish," he said,  "Who cares if it's raining? Let's go for a walk,  boy!" And off they went, splashing in the puddles. There,  at the zebra crossing, stood grumpy Mrs Makabela,  the traffic cop. She looked cold, and wet,  and miserable. The old man knew just what to do. "Morning, Mrs Makabela!" he called, and smiled his biggest, brightest smile. But Mrs Makabela did not smile back.
A great, big smile lit up Mrs Makabela's face! The school bell rang, and children ran to cross the road. Mrs Makabela put up her sign, and smiled, and smiled, at each and every child.
The children smiled at their moms and dads, and their gogos and tatas and brothers and sisters. They smiled at the bus driver and the greengrocer, and Mme Makau, who went off to smile at her husband,  who smiled at the mayor. The smiles leapt and rolled and beamed and gleamed until EVERYONE was smiling and giggling and laughing out loud in the rain.
In the library, everything was quiet except for the sound of the rain. "It's time to go," said Sizwe's mother, closing her book. "Aw,  mom!" said Sizwe,  who had run out of smiles.
But as they stepped out into the street  WHAT A SIGHT! Everyone in town was there! Everyone!  And they were ALL smiling!
The smiles bounced around and beamed at Sizwe. They warmed him, and tickled him, and crept up,  up, up from his toes to the TOP of his head. He was so full of happiness that the smile burst out, brilliant and beaming bright. And something changed. The dark, gloomy, rainy afternoon didn't seem so dark anymore. Could it be? YES! The clouds parted,  and the warm sun shone down on them, with the biggest, brightest, most brilliant smile of all.
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. "Ants don't read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need."
Little Ant would read all day, he'd read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down, the ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. "A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read."
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said, "Hey,  there's one!"
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger,  carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand, "Now I think I understand. The way you love to read a book makes me want to take a look."
"No Nomvula,  don't play with water. It is so scarce!" "But it's hot,  Mama! I feel like getting into this water. I want to be cool."
"No,  Nomvula. Don't play with water. Water is scarce." "But it's hot,  Mama,  I'm thirsty. I'd like to drink cold water."
It is raining. There is going to be a lot of water. Now I can't play – I wish it could be hot.
Look at the vegetables. They are growing and becoming green. Look! The bowls and buckets are overflowing with water.
It has stopped raining. Now we can play! Look how beautiful everything is after the rain. The sky is clear and blue. Trees and grass are green,  and the plants are flowering.
Oh no! There the rain is again! When are we going to play?
Oh no,  me! I'm going to play,  even if it's raining! Oh it's so lovely to play in the rain. Chapha chapha chapha! Imanz'ilokhwe yam! Imanz'ilokhwe yam! Chapha chapha chapha! Zimanz'iinwele zam! Zimanz'iinwele zam!
Nomvula,  you don't want to listen,  my child. Come closer,  let me dry and comb your hair. Chapha chapha chapha! Zimanz'iinwele zakho! Zimanz'iinwele zakho!
Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.
Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.
Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.
After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.
Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means “daughter of the people of Kanyada.” She was a strong and beautiful woman.
Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. “First open my gift,” said Odongo. “No, my gift first!” said Apiyo.
After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.
Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. They chased butterflies and birds.
They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.
When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!
The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.
Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.
Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.
One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.
On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar­Kanyada.She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.
At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.
But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.
When their father came to fetch them, they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. She smiled and said, “I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again.”
Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.
When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school they told their friends about life in the village. Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!
In my home village,  there is a trader called Dembe.
Dembe has a big shop in the village.
The shop sells flour,  sugar,  rice,  beans,  and many more things.
Dembe and his wife have three children. The children help in the shop during the holidays.
Each day,  Dembe adds up the money they earned.
Dembe has a business book. In the book he writes the amount they earn each day. He also writes what they spend to buy things for the shop.
Dembe and his wife can afford a big house and a car.
They also keep cows,  chickens and rabbits.
This family has a good life. One day,  the children will take over the shop. But first they will finish school.
Ghum-Ghum was excited. Shewas going for her first swim."BBRRRAAAP! GHRRUMB!" saidher family, who were excited too.
Ghum-Ghum’ssnout touched the water and… WHOOOSH!Theriver rushed all around her. Ghum-Ghumpaddled her feet and swished her tail. "Look, Papa! I’m swimming! Look…!"
"… Papa?"Ghum-Ghumlooked in front and looked behind. She looked to the right, and then to theleft. "Papa?"Shewas alone. Her family had swum off without her.
Anotter floated past."Haveyou seen my family, Mr. Otter?" asked Ghum-Ghum. "No,but I’ve seen a lot of stars," said the otter. "Would you like to see some?""Maybenext time. Thanks!" said Ghum-Ghum.
Justthen – "BRROFFTT!RRRAAPP!"Itwas her family! Ghum-Ghum giggled happily, and swam towards the sound.
Suddenly,a dolphin leapt up in front of her."Doyou know where my family is, Miss Dolphin?" asked Ghum-Ghum. "No,but I do know where the yummiest fish are," said the dolphin. "Would you liketo eat one?""Maybenext time. Thanks!" said Ghum-Ghum.
Justthen – "DRRUPHH! GHRAAAP!"Itwas her family! Ghum-Ghum giggled happily, and swam towards the sound.
Asnail lay on a rock by the river bank."Can you help me find myfamily, Sister Snail?" asked Ghum-Ghum. "I can help you find a niceflat rock to sit on, if you want," said the snail. "Maybe next time. Thanks!"said Ghum-Ghum.
Just then – "PHBTHRR!FFRAFFFT!"It was her family! Ghum-Ghumgiggled happily, and swam towards the sound.
Ghum-Ghumsaw a big old gharial. Many little gharials swam around him."Haveyou seen my family, Grandpa Gharial?" Ghum-Ghum asked.
"Is your name Ghum-Ghum?" asked the old gharial."Yes, I’m Ghum-Ghum," she said."Then I HAVE seen your family! They’ve been looking everywhere for you, little one. Listen! There, down the river! Can you hear them?"
Ghum-Ghum listened. All theother little gharials listened too.Just then, from up the river– "GHRAPP! GHUM! BRRAFFTT!GHUM! GHUUUM! GHOOOOOOM!"It was her family, and theyweren’t very far off! Ghum-Ghum giggled, and swam towards the sound.
Soon, Ghum-Ghum reached asand bank. She crawled onto it, tiredfrom all her swimming. "Ghum-Ghum?" said avoice."Papa?"
A large, dark shape came towardsher."Papa!"Papa bent down and lovingly nudged Ghum-Ghum."Welcome home,Ghum-Ghum!" said Papa. "Where did you go off to?""I went on a gloriousadventure!" said Ghum-Ghum, giggling. "And tomorrow, I want to go again!"
Ghum-Ghum lives by the great river Ganga with her big, noisy family of gharials. She goes swimming every day, to catch insects and fish for her lunch. Ghum-Ghum meets all kinds of creatures on her daily swims: dolphins, otters, snails, water birds, fishermen in boats, buffaloes, snakes, and many others. How many of Ghum-Ghum's river friends can you spot in this page and the next?
Sara has a canoe. Her canoe is big. It is by the riverside.
Some women come to the river. One woman has a basin of fruit. Another woman has a chicken. Another woman has a goat. Another woman has two goats. They ask Sara, "How can we get to the other side of the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!"
Then, some men arrive. One man has a fish. Another man has a bicycle. Another man has a sack of maize.
Another man has two sacks of maize. They ask Sara, "How can we get to the other side of the river?" Sara replies, "Get in my canoe!"
Some animals come to the river. They ask Sara, "How can we get across the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!"
The animals get in the canoe. The dog gets in the canoe. The cat gets in the canoe. The monkey gets in the canoe. The rabbit gets in the canoe. The turtle gets in the canoe. The gazelle gets in the canoe.
The elephant arrives at the river. He asks, "How can I get to the other side of the river?" Sara says, "Get in my canoe!" The elephant gets in the canoe. The canoe fills up with water.
The canoe is too small. There isn't enough room.
Sara says, "Hold on! First I'll take the women."
Sara says, "Second, I'll take the men."
Sara says, "Finally, I'll take the animals."
The elephant says, "I'm just going to walk!"
It is one week until Thato’s birthday. That’s seven whole days!
His mama says: “Your birthday present will be a BIG surprise!” Thato wonders: what will it be?
On Monday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get giant wings so I can fly high in the sky like a bird…”
On Tuesday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will have a birthday cake as big as a house!”
On Wednesday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get a rocket ship to whizz up to the moon.”
On Thursday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get fins so I can swim under the water like a fish.”
On Friday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get magic soccer boots and score a thousand goals!”
On Saturday Thato thinks: “Maybe I will get a key that opens a box filled with treasure!”
On Sunday it is Thato’s birthday. Mama smiles and says: “Come and see your surprise!”
It is the best present ever. Thato’s big brother Kudzai has come to visit all the way from the big city!
Thato smiles and smiles and his big brother lifts him up in the air and hugs him.Kudzai asks: “What do you want to do for your birthday, little brother?”
And Thato knows exactly what they will do the whole day long.
I can hop
I can skip.
I can dance.
I can build a car.
I can wink.
I can sing.
I can read.
The Winter cold had passed. Spring was coming to Nkanyezi's village. Soon the villagers would gather to celebrate the new season. Nkanyezi looked forward to the Spring festival more than any other day in the year.
One warm morning, Nkanyezi overheard two village elders talking about the festival. "The people of Ndlovu have lost their spirit of celebration," one sighed. "How can we have a Spring festival in a village that has forgotten how to celebrate?" asked another.
Nkanyezi was worried. "How will the sun shine again unless we sing to wake it from its winter slumber?" she asked herself. Nkanyezi thought for a long time. "I must find what we have lost," she decided. "I must go in search of things that will bring back the spirit of celebration to my village."
The elders gave Nkanyezi their blessing for the journey. They gave her a bag to carry the things she would find. Nkanyezi was afraid, but she believed she would succeed.
Nkanyezi walked all day. She hiked up a hill, and down into a valley. She sailed across the great river, and climbed between sharp rocks. She marched across the plains until she reached the shadow of the red mountains.
As night was closing in, Nkanyezi arrived at a village of patterns and colours as she had never seen before. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.The mother of this tribe gave Nkanyezi a gift. She told the girl, "With love we give to you this paint to restore colour to your village." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the paint in her bag. Early the next morning she went on her way.
Nkanyezi walked all day, through a vast forest of giant trees. As the sky became too dark for her to see, she heard the sound of beating drums. She hurried towards the drumming, feeling the spirit of dance coming to her tired feet.
Nkanyezi found herself in the village of the Bhubezi. People were sitting around a fire, drumming and singing. She had never before heard such wonderful music. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The Bhubezi invited her to rest and stay the night.
In the morning the chief called on Nkanyezi. "My child," he said, "here is a special drum. It plays a new song every time you beat it." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the drum in her bag. She went on her way again, delighted with this gift of music and dance.
On the third day of her journey, as she passed a field of fat cows, her nose started to tingle. An aroma tickled her taste buds and her mouth started to water. She followed the scent, and arrived in a village to find people standing over steaming pots of stew. This tribe was famous for its feasts and Nkanyezi had never before tasted such flavours. After she had eaten her fill, she told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.
The next day, the council of cooks gave her a secret spice blend. "Our daughter," they said, "with these spices, happy tummies are guaranteed! We give you the gift of good food." Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the spices in her bag. She knew she had everything she needed. With new energy she started the long journey back to the village of Ndlovu.
When she arrived home the villagers gathered around her to hear of her adventures. She told them the tales of what she had seen, heard, and eaten. Then she opened her bag to share the gifts given. The villagers rejoiced to receive these treasures. The generosity of others and the courage of Nkanyezi brought back colour, song and dance to the people.  And so the spirit of celebration was restored to the village of Ndlovu.
All of us went to the fun fair.
Father bought brother fancy glasses. Mother bought me a bright blue cap. The baby got sugar candy.
On the way home,  a very strong wind came. It blew my cap away.
My cap got stuck on a branch of a big old tree.
I cried a lot. And I did not eat my dinner.
Later that night,  the moon came up. It looked at my cap in the big old tree.
The moon tried on my cap. It smiled happily. I had to smile too.
After school the next day,  my mother gave me a shiny new red cap. "The moon sent it," she said.
That night,  both the moon and I wore our caps and smiled. We were happy.
Do you think the sun needs a hat?
Guess which cap I am wearing today!
once upon a time there was a boy Kris , he was not entrusted to going school , his mother put pressure on him so that he can pass his exams and clear his NDA exam
the whether was very clear outside , the clouds were roaming around
then after some time rain started , he was going home he  had an umbrella that time
then he saw a spider that was in rain , then Raman gave umbralla to that spider then the spider changed into a magical butterfly
then that butterfly gave that boy a magical umbrella that can fly him and change any type of weather anytime
Many years ago,  the Lizard and the Frog were friends. One day  they decided to look for girlfriends in the city.
The Frog was jealous of  the Lizard's shining and brilliant skin.
He said,  "What did you do to look so beautiful? Look at me,  I am so ugly. What can I do about my skin?"
The Lizard said,  "Listen! Put some water in a pot and put it on the fire. Next you....."
But the Frog said,  "I know already,  I know! Keep quiet,  my friend!" And he left.
Frog arrived home and put some water in a pot.
When the water began to boil,  he threw himself into it.
His skin was burnt and his tail came off!
Instead of being brilliant and beautiful like the Lizard,  he was even more ugly!
Un arc-en-ciel has seven colours.
The first colour is rouge.
Kewyu is wearing une chemise rouge.
The second couleur is orange.
This is une orange. What else can you see that is le couleur orange?
The third colour is jaune.
Le jaune of an egg is jaune. What else can you see that is jaune?
The fourth colour is vert.
Our jardin de bananes is vert.
The fifth colour is bleu.
The ciel is bleu.
The sixième couleur is indigo.
These berries are le couleur indigo.
The seventh couleur est violet.
Violet is my couleur préférée! What is your couleur préférée?
Do you know the seven colours of the rainbow in French?
One day, mama bought different fruits.
"When can we have some fruit?" we asked. "We will eat the fruit tonight," said mama.
My brother Rahim is greedy. He tasted all the fruit. He ate a lot of it.
"Look at what Rahim did!" shouted my little brother. "Rahim is naughty and selfish," I said.
Mama was angry with Rahim.
We were also angry with Rahim. But Rahim was not sorry.
"Are you going to punish Rahim?" asked little brother.
"Rahim, you will be sorry soon," warned mama.
Rahim started feeling unwell.
"My stomach is painful," whispered Rahim.
Mama knew why Rahim was sick. "The fruit is punishing Rahim," she thought.
Later, Rahim said sorry to us. "I will never be so greedy again," he promised. We believed him.
These are giraffes. They have very long necks. They eat leaves from tall trees. How many legs does a giraffe have?
This is an elephant. The males have white tusks. They have large ears. Elephants have long trunks. They use their trunks to pick leaves off the tall trees. Elephants eat grasses and leaves.What do elephants eat?
This is a crocodile. It lives in the rivers and lakes. It has a long tail. It has a wide mouth and many sharp teeth. It eats fish and other animals. Where do crocodile live?
This is a lion. It has big, sharp teeth. Male lions have a mane. Where is the mane on this lion?
This is the crested crane. It is the symbol of Uganda. It has long legs and a crown. What are the colours of the crested crane?
These are water buffaloes. They eat grasses and live near rivers and lakes. What do buffaloes eat
These animals are called zebras. They have black and white stripes.   What are the colours of a zebra?
Here are two different types of animals. There is a mother warthog with her babies. Warthogs have tusks too. How many warthogs can you count in the picture? The other animals are antelopes. They eat grasses. What do antelopes eat?
What types of animals do you see? Where do they live? Which other animals do you know? What animals have you seen?
Baboon and Crocodile were the best of friends. They played together. They ate together. They did everything together.
But one day,  Crocodile got very sick. He was close to dying. Crocodile went to the nyabezi. "If you want to get better,  you have to eat baboon meat," said the nyabenzi.
When he heard this, Crocodile cried. If he wanted to get better, he had no choice than to eat his friend the baboon.
When Baboon went to see his friend, he got on Crocodile's back. Crocodile took Baboon out to the deepest part of the river.
"What is troubling you, my friend?" asked Baboon.Crocodile said, "The nyabezi told me that if I want to get better I must eat you, my friend."
Baboon replied,  "No, don't eat me. I'm too small!Wait a minute and I'll call my grandfather. He's bigger than me. Eat him and you'll be full."
Crocodile said,  "Where is this grandfather of yours?"Baboon replied,  "He's in the tree on that island." Crocodile said,  "Go and get him so that I may eat him."
Baboon jumped off Crocodile's back and ran straight up the tree. Crocodile waited and waited. But Baboon did not return. And that was the end of their friendship.
Long, long ago, when Zebra's skin was still white, a terrible drought occurred. For months not a single drop of rain fell. The grass turned dull, the trees became bare and the rivers dried up one by one. Springbok, Warthog and Zebra had to walk very far each day in search of water.
One morning when Springbok arrived at the only watering hole, he heard an angry voice say, “Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!” Springbok's eyes widened. Baboon was sitting on a rock next to the watering hole, grilling bananas over his open fire. “But I'm so thirsty, my tongue feels like biltong,” Springbok said. “Where will I find water?”
Baboon growled. “Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole.” Springbok saw Baboon's long teeth and was scared. He turned around and trotted away.
After a while Warthog came trotting along. But as soon as he lowered his head to take a sip of water, he heard an angry voice, “Make way!Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!” Surprised, Warthog turned around. He saw Baboon sitting on the rock next to the watering hole grilling his bananas.
“But I'm so thirsty, it feels as if I've eaten dust,” Warthog said. "Where will I find water?" Baboon growled. “Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole.” Warthog bristled at first, but when he saw Baboon's long teeth, he got scared. He turned around and trotted away, tail in the air.
After a while Zebra turned up at the watering hole. Before he could take a sip of water he heard an angry voice. “Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!” Zebra snorted and looked up. He saw Baboon sitting on the rock grilling his bananas.
“But I'm so thirsty, it feels as if my tongue slept outside my mouth last night,” Zebra said. “Where will I find water?” “Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll!This is Baboon's watering hole.” Baboon showed his long teeth. Zebra wasn't scared. With clip-clopping hooves he stormed atbaboon. He was so angry that he ran right through Baboon's burning fire. Sparks and smoke and bananas were flying.
Baboon tried to escape, but it was too late. Zebra kicked him so hard that he flew through the air. “Ouch!” Baboon yelled. His butt landed on a sun baked rock. The rock was so hot that it burned off Baboon's hair. From that day Baboon has never had hair on his butt.
And Zebra's skin has never been lilywhite again. Baboon's fire burned stripes onto his skin.
It was now safe for the animals to drink at the watering hole. And each morning, as they came to drink water, Springbok, Warthog and Zebra sang, “Come wet your throat here while you stroll, this is everybody's watering hole!
There once lived a chicken, called Cikizwa, who was an orphan.One day Cikizwa was out looking for food when she saw a mole coming out of his hole. She started speaking to the mole, but he ignored her.
From that day on, the mole and Cikizwa became great friends. The friends often hugged each other tightly. They loved and looked after each other.
Elephant often said really unkind things to Cikizwa to try and make her unhappy. One morning, when Cikizwa greeted Elephant, he snubbed her and said, “Ha, ha, ha! Go away, you orphan! What do you want from me? You’re so skinny. It’s as if you haven’t had enough mealies to eat!” Cikizwa was heartbroken.
The next day it rained and rained. It rained so heavily that many animals were swept away by the nearby river. Cikizwa was safe in her little coop because her father had been clever enough to build a drain nearby so that it didn’t get flooded.
But Cikizwa still felt sad about what had happened to some of her friends.Once the rain stopped, beautiful, colourful flowers appeared and there was a cool breeze. Cikizwa was out enjoying the sunshine when she saw Elephant limping along and crying loudly. Kind Cikizwa quickly called an ambulance.
When the ambulance arrived, Elephant got the help he needed. His leg was bandaged and he was given an injection to help with the pain. As soon as Elephant started to feel better, he thanked Cikizwa for her kindness.Then he said, “Cikizwa, my child, never change who you are. Keep on respecting and loving everyone.”
But Gumbi and Cikizwa didn’t care. They became even closer. Gumbi taught Cikizwa how to swim and dive, and Cikizwa taught Gumbi how to scratch in the sand for food.Eventually Gumbi asked Cikizwa to marry him. Cikizwa agreed immediately. Together they decided to have their wedding the following Saturday at a place that they both loved near the river.
Their wedding day arrived. The sun was blazing hot. What a wonderful wedding it was!The animal choir sang beautifully. Iguanas, whales, crocodiles, seals, sharks, dolphins, sheep, cattle, dogs, antelopes, hares, porcupines, water snakes and other animals all sang together:“It is enjoyable here at the wedding of the fish. It is enjoyable here at the wedding of the chicken!”
Long time ago, in the village of Elunyiko, there lived a man called Ndonga and his wife called Namukhaywa. They had six children. All of them were girls.
When Namukhaywa was pregnant with her seventh child, Ndonga warned her, "If you give birth to another girl, I will leave you. But if you give me a baby boy, I will hold a big party for you!"
When it was time to give birth, Namukhaywa went to the traditional midwife. Would the child be a girl or a boy?
It was a boy AND a girl – twins! She called the boy Mukhwana, and the girl she called Mulongo. As she looked at Mukhwana, she was very happy. But as she looked at Mulongo, she felt sad. She felt that there was only one thing she could do.
Namukhaywa left Mulongo in the care of the midwife and took Mukhwana home to her husband.
She proudly showed Ndonga the baby boy. He was very happy and called all the villagers to celebrate the birth of his son.
Mukhwana grew up to be a fine young man. And Mulongo grew up to be a fine young woman.
One day, while minding his father's cattle, Mukhwana saw a very beautiful girl. "This is the girl I want to marry," he said to himself.
But when he asked her to marry him, she sang this song: Mukhwana wefwe, Mukhwana. So yakhupa omunwa, Mukhwana. Nebebula omukhana, Mukhwana. Barulaka khulwanda, Mukhwana. Nebebula omusiani, Mukhwana. Barera mungo muno, Mukhwana. Iyeyi yakwa, Mukhwana. Iyindi yakwa, Mukhwana.
This happened again and again. Mukhwana did not know what to do. He went to his mother, Namukhaywa. "I have found a beautiful girl," he said. "And I want to marry her. But every time I ask her, she sings the same song."
To his surprise, Namukhaywa said, "What the girl is singing about is true. That is your sister. You were born twins. Your father wanted a son, not a daughter. So I left your baby sister with the midwife, and brought you home to your father."
When Mukhwana told his father the story, he saw that he had been wrong. He called Namukhaywa and together they went to the midwife to fetch Mulongo.
When Mulongo arrived home, her father and the village elders slaughtered a goat and performed the traditional ceremony for re-uniting Mulongo and her seven siblings.
A year later, Mulongo was married to the son of the rich king of that village. She brought a lot of wealth and happiness to her family.
Once upon a time, there was a goat called Igodhoobe*. Igodhoobe the goat was the king of farm animals and birds. He lived a good life. One day, Igodhoobe the goat called all the animals and birds to a meeting.*pronounced ee-god-who-buhe
"My friends, I have called you because I had a dream," said the goat. All the animals and birds kept quiet. They listened to their king carefully.
"I dreamed that there was no food or water left in the land. Many of our relatives died!" said the king. When the animals and the birds heard the dream, they were worried. "What shall we do?" asked the cat.
The hen and the duck had an idea. They said, "Let each one of us bring food and put it in the king's store." All the animals agreed with this idea.
The king made a rule. He said, "Get ropes. Tie up anyone who does not bring food to my store. Then carry him to me."
But, soon after this, it was time for a new king to rule over the farm. All the animals and birds met and elected the cat as their new king.
But the goat refused to agree that the cat was king. "I'm the king. There is no other king. I can't obey any other animal," said the goat.
The animals took food to the new king's store. But the goat did not take anything. "When the goat was king, we all obeyed him. Now he does not want to obey our new king. What shall we do?" asked the cow.
All the domestic animals and birds were angry. "He thinks he is different to us," they all muttered.
The dog said, "I helped him when he was king. I did not sleep at night. I was always with him, ready to help."
The sheep said, "I gave him my wool to cover his children."
The pig said, "When he was king, he told his friends that I eat a lot. But I was often in his garden digging and weeding his maize and millet."
The sheep asked, "What did he say? That you eat a lot? Did he think that he will be king forever?" Then the sheep added, "Let him understand that he is not king any more. I don't know why he thinks he is so important."
All the animals laughed and agreed that the goat must take food to the new king. King Cat ordered the goat to come to him.
When the animals went to fetch the goat, he was sitting on a chair with his legs crossed. "I shall not go to the cat. There is no other king except me. When you become a king, you are always a king," said the goat.
"We will tie you with ropes and take you to the new king," said the sheep.
So the cow tied the goat to her tail. She then pulled him to the king. The sheep, the duck, the dog, the pig, and the cock cheered as the cow pulled the goat. They all shouted, "Take this stubborn goat to our new king!"
From that time, every goat refuses to move when it is pulled. It thinks that you are taking it to the king's court.
Have you ever seen a herd of cows in the field? Every now and then you will notice a cow shaking her head. She tries to drive away the flies that pester her. But why do the flies zoom-zoom­zee around Cow's head?
They say it started long, long ago in a far-off country. The country's queen was very rich and had a kind heart. One day she decided to arrange a huge banquet. All the animals were invited. The enormous tables were beautifully laden. Every table groaned under the delicacies, dishes full of meat, freshly baked bread, steaming vegetables and honey-sweet fruit.
The animals smacked their lips when they saw the delicious food. “The largest animal at each table should sit at the head,” the queen said. “It is his or her job to dish out the food.” Cow shared a table with Sheep, Goat, Dog, Goose and Fly. Since Cow was the biggest, she started dishing out the food. Each animal received a big chunk of home-baked bread with grape jam and cheese.
But because Fly was so small, Cow hardly noticed her. “Zoom! Zoom! Zee! What about me? I'd also like something to eat, you see?” Fly grumbled. But Cow pretended not to hear Fly. She tucked into the delicious bread. Poor Fly sat there deprived of everything, watching the other animals eat.
When they had finished the last crumb of bread, Cow started dishing out the meat and vegetables. Each animal received a large plate of food. But because Fly was so small, Cow once again hardly noticed her. “Zoom! Zoom! Zee! What about me? I'd also like something to eat, you see?” Fly grumbled louder than before. Cow rolled her eyes and was annoyed with Fly.
“Hey! Where are your manners?” Cow said. “A bug like you doesn't even belong at the queen's banquet. You can wait until the bigger animals have finished.” The food was finished in two ticks. Poor Fly didn't receive the tiniest morsel. Cow started sharing the fruit. There were delicious water melon, juicy spanspek and red-cheeked apples.
All the animals received food, but Fly had to go without it. “Zoom! Zoom! Zee! What about me? I'd also like something to eat, you see?” Fly complained. Cow laughed and took a bite from her apple. “Do you hear something?” she asked the other animals at the table. “I don't hear anything.” In a jiffy all the food at the table had been finished. The animals were overstuffed. Everyone except Fly. Her tummy growled with hunger.
After the meal it was time to dance and be merry. But Fly was angry. She decided to go home. The queen noticed Fly. “Why are you leaving, Fly?” the queen asked. “Don't you enjoy my banquet?” Fly curtsied before the queen. “I'm sorry, your Majesty,” she said. “I'm sure the food was delicious. But I didn't have a tiny morsel of food.” And she told the queen what had happened. The queen was very angry when she heard what Cow had done.
“From now on you and your friends may pester Cow every day,” the queen said. “From morning till night you may buzz around her ears. It will teach her a lesson. She will never be able to ignore you again. And she'll see that even the tiniest insect is important to me.”
And that is exactly what Fly has been doing until today. She and her friends buzz around Cow's ears from morning till night. And while they are doing it, they sing: “Zoom! Zoom! Zee! Never ever again, Can you ignore us. Say amen!”
An old woman gave an egg to her grandson.
The boy gave the egg to berry pickers. They broke it.
The boy cried, “That egg was for bride wealth!”
The berry pickers gave him a stick.
The boy gave the stick to builders. They broke it.
The boy cried, “That stick belonged to the berry pickers!”
The builders gave him a bundle of grass.
The boy met a herder. A cow ate the grass.
The boy cried, “That grass belonged to the builders!”
The herder gave the boy a cow.
The boy found a marriage celebration. They slaughtered his cow.
The boy cried, “That cow belonged to the herder!”
The bride’s family gave him the bride.
Crickets chirp.
Mice squeak.
Snakes hiss.
Dogs bark.
Goats bleat.
Cows moo.
Lions roar.
And snails make no sound at all.
Babies babble.
And children talk.
In a village on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa,  a little girl worked in the fields with her mother. Her name was Wangari.
Wangari loved being outside. In her family's food garden she broke up the soil with her machete. She pressed tiny seeds into the warm earth.
Her favourite time of day was just after sunset. When it got too dark to see the plants,  Wangari knew it was time to go home. She would follow the narrow paths through the fields,  crossing rivers as she went.
Wangari was a clever child and couldn't wait to go to school. But her mother and father wanted her to stay and help them at home. When she was seven years old,  her big brother persuaded her parents to let her go to school.
She liked to learn! Wangari learnt more and more with every book she read. She did so well at school that she was invited to study in the United States of America. Wangari was excited! She wanted to know more about the world.
At the American university Wangari learnt many new things. She studied plants and how they grow. And she remembered how she grew: playing games with her brothers in the shade of the trees in the beautiful Kenyan forests.
The more she learnt,  the more she realised that she loved the people of Kenya. She wanted them to be happy and free. The more she learnt,  the more she remembered her African home.
When she had finished her studies,  she returned to Kenya. But her country had changed. Huge farms stretched across the land. Women had no wood to make cooking fires. The people were poor and the children were hungry.
Wangari knew what to do. She taught the women how to plant trees from seeds. The women sold the trees and used the money to look after their families. The women were very happy. Wangari had helped them to feel powerful and strong.
As time passed,  the new trees grew into forests,  and the rivers started flowing again. Wangari's message spread across Africa. Today,  millions of trees have grown from Wangari's seeds.
Wangari had worked hard. People all over the world took notice,  and gave her a famous prize. It is called the Nobel Peace Prize,  and she was the first African woman ever to receive it.
Wangari died in 2011,  but we can think of her every time we see a beautiful tree.
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung’s shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife’s homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize’s shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. “It started well,” thinks Mkhize. “But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I’m reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf.”
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung’s kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize’s kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung’s shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. “What are you staring at?” asks Jabu. “Your kota! It looks bigger than mine,” says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu’s is bigger. “Something is not right here,” says Zodwa. “I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize’s shop is not busy anymore.” Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies, “Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!”
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she’s curious. She asks them what’s wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, “A kota is a quarter of a loaf!” Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, “The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters.”
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. “So, he is stealing bread from us!” she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize’s shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren’t new customers. “Oh, hello again kids,” he mutters, “how can I help you?” “Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter,” says Zodwa, pointing at her kota. “I want a quarter kota or my money back,” she adds firmly.
“Is it true Mr Mkhize? You’ve been cheating us!” cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. “What are you saying about me?” he protests. “I’m not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!”
Then Zodwa says quietly, “We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!” Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
“OK,” he says eventually, “I will give you your money back. “And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas,” speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, “I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas.”
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.
Once long ago,  the birds had a meeting. They wanted a king.
The Eagle wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "Your call is too sad to be king." The Ostrich wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You can't fly."
Peacock wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You are too proud. You cannot be king." Owl wanted to be king. The other birds said,  "You sleep during the day. You cannot be king."
And so they did not get too far. Then one bird said,  "Who can fly the highest? That bird should be king." All the birds flew up up up into the sky.
Goose flew over the highest mountains in the world. Eagle flew into the blue above the mountains. But Vulture flew without stopping,  up towards the sun.
High above them,  the birds heard Vulture cry,  "I am the highest,  I am king!"
Vulture heard a tiny voice,  "Tink,  tink,  tink! I am the highest,  I am king." It was Ncede,  the Neddicky,  the smallest bird of all! He had held onto the feathers of Vulture as he flew up into the sky!
So Vulture flew down with the little bird still under his wing. The other birds were cross with Ncede. They waited for him,  ready to pluck out all his feathers.
But the quick little bird saw how angry they were,  and flew into an empty snake hole.
The birds told Owl to wait near the hole and catch him when he comes out. So Owl sat in front of the hole.
But the sun was warm and soon Owl was fast asleep. The little bird peeped out,  saw that Owl was asleep,  and z-zip,  away he went.
Owl was very ashamed that he had let the little bird escape. Now he only hunts at night. In the day,  he sleeps,  away from the sight of the other birds.
The Winter cold had passed. Spring was coming to Nkanyezi’s village. Soon the villagers would gather to celebrate the new season. Nkanyezi looked forward to the Spring festival more than any other day in the year.
One warm morning, Nkanyezi overheard two village elders talking about the festival.“The people of Ndlovu have lost their spirit of celebration,” one sighed.“How can we have a Spring festival in a village that has forgotten how to celebrate?” asked another.
Nkanyezi was worried. “How will the sun shine again unless we sing to wake it from its winter slumber?” she asked herself.Nkanyezi thought for a long time.“I must find what we have lost,” she decided.“I must go in search of things that will bring back the spirit of celebration to my village.”
The elders gave Nkanyezi their blessing for the journey. They gave her a bag to carry the things she would find.Nkanyezi was afraid, but she believed she would succeed.
Nkanyezi walked all day. She hiked up a hill, and down into a valley. She sailed across the great river, and climbed between sharp rocks. She marched across the plains until she reached the shadow of the red mountains.
As night was closing in, Nkanyezi arrived at a village of patterns and colours as she had never seen before. She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The mother of this tribe gave Nkanyezi a gift.She told the girl, “With love we give to you this paint to restore colour to a village that has gone dull.”Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the paint in her bag. Early the next morning she went on her way again, excited with this gift of colour.
Nkanyezi walked all day, through a vast forest of giant trees. As the sky became too dark for her to see, she heard the sound of beating drums. She hurried towards the drumming, feeling the spirit of dance coming to her tired feet
Nkanyezi found herself in the village of the Bhubezi. People were sitting around a fire, drumming and singing. She had never before heard such wonderful music.She told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people. The Bhubezi invited her to rest and stay the night.
In the morning the chief called on Nkanyezi.“My child,” he said, “here is a special drum. It plays a new song every time you beat it.” Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the drum in her bag. She went on her way again, delighted with this gift of music and dance.
On the third day of her journey, as she passed a field of fat cows, her nose started to tingle. An aroma tickled her taste buds and her mouth started to water. She followed the scent, and arrived in a village to find people standing over steaming pots of stew.This tribe was famous for its feasts and Nkanyezi had never before tasted such flavours. After she had eaten her fill, she told the village elders about her journey to bring back the spirit of celebration to her people.
The next day, the council of cooks gave her a secret spice blend.“Our daughter,” they said, “with these spices, happy tummies are guaranteed! We give you the gift of good food.”Nkanyezi thanked the elders and put the spices in her bag. She knew she had everything she needed.With new energy she started the long journey back to the village of Ndlovu.
When she arrived home the villagers gathered around her to hear of her adventures. She told them the tales of what she had seen, heard, and eaten. Then she opened her bag to share the gifts given. The people rejoiced to receive these treasures.Through the generosity of others and the courage of Nkanyezi, the villagers again found the colour, song and dance in their lives. And so the spirit of celebration was restored to the village of Ndlovu.
Long ago Hen and Eagle were friends. One day,  Eagle found Hen under a tree resting with her hopping bags. Hen was standing on one leg.
Eagle asked Hen,  "Where is your other leg?"
Hen told Eagle,  "The shopkeeper cut off my leg and gave me these groceries in return."
Eagle asked Hen whether he could do the same. He also wanted a bag of groceries. Hen agreed.
Eagle went to the shopkeeper and asked her to cut off one of his legs in exchange for groceries. The shopkeeper accepted.
The eagle hopped on one leg all the way home. But he was happy with the things the shopkeeper gave him.
When Eagle reached home,  he found Hen with both her legs.
Eagle was furious and chased Hen. But he never caught her. Instead,  Eagle always looks out for Hen's children. Whenever he catches one,  he eats it.
Hello! My name is Nanu. I am waiting with my mother for a taxi. We are going home.
Here I am standing in line. My mother sings me a song. "Come Mr Taxi can't you see? We are waiting,  Nanu and me!"
The lady next to me is taking her chickens home. They will lay eggs for her to eat.
These men are coming back from work. They smile at me. I hear them sing,  "Hey little Nanu,  don't you worry. Taxi's coming in a hurry."
A lady walks past. She is a very smart lady. Aren't her shoes beautiful? They go "click,  click,  clickclick,  click,  click" when she walks.
This man is selling cold drinks. I love cold drinks. They are so cold and sweet. Do you like them?
Look! There are ladies taking their supper home on their heads. Aren't they clever?
That lady is having her hair done. She is going out with her friends tonight.
I am tired now. My mother puts me on her back where I can rest. She sings,  "Please Mr Taxi,  don't be late,  Gogo is waiting at our gate."
There is my friend Tumi. He is also resting. We will be home soon.
High up there the birds are flying home. They must get home before it is dark.
This lady has beautiful earrings. I think she bought them in town today. When I grow up I will buy many earrings for me and my mother.
My mother is getting tired now. I sing her a song,  "Please Mr Taxi,  won't you come,  we are waiting,  me and mum."
Wait! I can hear the taxi! Here it comes!
This is our big red taxi. It has come to take me and my mother home. I am very happy!
Goodbye!
They closed the schools, and sent us home.
We cannot play with other children.
I miss being with my friends.
I miss going to school.
Mother is worried about Uncle.He is sick in hospital.
Our parents are worried about everything.
Everyone is worried about getting sick from this virus.
All we hear about is the coronavirus!I wish it would go away!
Have you ever seen a herd of cows in the field? Every now and then you will notice a cow shaking her head. She tries to drive away the flies that pester her. But why do the flies zoom-zoom-zee around Cow's head?
They say it started long, long ago in a far-off country. The country's queen was very rich and had a kind heart. One day she decided to arrange a huge banquet. All the animals were invited. The enormous tables were beautifully laden. Every table groaned under the delicacies, dishes full of meat, freshly baked bread, steaming vegetables and honey-sweet fruit.
The animals smacked their lips when they saw the delicious food. "The largest animal at each table should sit at the head," the queen said. "It is his or her job to dish out the food." Cow shared a table with Sheep, Goat, Dog, Goose and Fly. Since Cow was the biggest, she started dishing out the food. Each animal received a big chunk of home-baked bread with grape jam and cheese.
But because Fly was so small, Cow hardly noticed her. "Zoom! Zoom! Zee! What about me? I'd also like something to eat, you see?" Fly grumbled. But Cow pretended not to hear Fly. She tucked into the delicious bread. Poor Fly sat there deprived of everything, watching the other animals eat.
When they had finished the last crumb of bread, Cow started dishing out the meat and vegetables. Each animal received a large plate of food. But because Fly was so small, Cow once again hardly noticed her. "Zoom! Zoom! Zee! What about me? I'd also like something to eat, you see?" Fly grumbled louder than before. Cow rolled her eyes and was annoyed with Fly.
"Hey! Where are your manners?" Cow said. "A bug like you doesn't even belong at the queen's banquet. You can wait until the bigger animals have finished." The food was finished in two ticks. Poor Fly didn't receive the tiniest morsel. Cow started sharing the fruit. There were delicious water melon, juicy spanspek and red-cheeked apples.
All the animals received food, but Fly had to go without. "Zoom! Zoom! Zee! What about me? I'd also like something to eat, you see?" Fly complained. Cow laughed and took a bite from her apple. "Do you hear something?" she asked the other animals at the table. "I don't hear anything." In a jiffy all the food at the table had been finished. The animals were overstuffed. Everyone except Fly. Her tummy growled with hunger.
After the meal, it was time to dance and be merry. But Fly was angry. She decided to go home. The queen noticed Fly. "Why are you leaving, Fly?" the queen asked. "Don't you enjoy my banquet?" Fly curtsied before the queen. "I'm sorry, your Majesty," she said. "I'm sure the food was delicious. But I didn't have a tiny morsel of food." And she told the queen what had happened. The queen was very angry when she heard what Cow had done.
"From now on you and your friends may pester Cow every day," the queen said. "From morning till night you may buzz around her ears. It will teach her a lesson. She will never be able to ignore you again. And she'll see that even the tiniest insect is important to me."
And that is exactly what Fly has been doing until today. She and her friends buzz around Cow's ears from morning till night. And while they are doing it,  they sing: "Zoom! Zoom! Zee! Never ever again, can you ignore us. Say never!"
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung’s shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife’s homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize’s shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. “It started well,” thinks Mkhize. “But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I’m reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf.”
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung’s kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize’s kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung’s shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. “What are you staring at?” asks Jabu. “Your kota! It looks bigger than mine,” says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu’s is bigger. “Something is not right here,” says Zodwa. “I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize’s shop is not busy anymore.” Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies, “Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!”
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she’s curious. She asks them what’s wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, “A kota is a quarter of a loaf!” Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, “The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters.”
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. “So, he is stealing bread from us!” she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize’s shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren’t new customers. “Oh, hello again kids,” he mutters, “how can I help you?” “Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter,” says Zodwa, pointing at her kota. “I want a quarter kota or my money back,” she adds firmly.
“Is it true Mr Mkhize? You’ve been cheating us!” cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. “What are you saying about me?” he protests. “I’m not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!”
Then Zodwa says quietly, “We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!” Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
“OK,” he says eventually, “I will give you your money back. “And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas,” speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, “I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas.”
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.
Amara was walking through the park. The trees in the park were green and healthy. But, there was one tree that was brown and dry.
"This tree needs water," said Amara to herself. She watered the tree and it came to life with new growth. It was a magnificent green tree.
Then, the tree spoke! "You watered me and brought me back to life," said the tree. "I'm a magic tree, I shall grant you three wishes."
Amara made her first wish. "I wish for a red bicycle," she said cautiously. Abracadabra! A red bicycle appeared.
She made her second wish after thinking for a few moments. "I wish for a radio," said Amara. Abracadabra! A radio appeared.
Amara made her third wish. "I wish for pink crystal earrings," she said happily. Abracadabra! Pink crystal earrings appeared.
The magic tree said, "You have everything that you wanted." Amara smiled, "Yes I do, but those things were not for me." The magic tree looked confused.
"The bicycle is for my older brother. He outgrew his bicycle. The radio is for Dad. His radio broke. The earrings are for Mum. She loves fancy earrings," explained Amara. "And they will all share with me!" she added.
My mother planted.She planted a small garden.She planted a small garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a small garden.  He planted a small garden of flowers.
My mother weeded in both gardens.
My father watered in both gardens.
My parents and I worked in the small gardens.My sister and I  harvested the flowers and peas.
The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.
Hyena and Raven were once great friends, even though they were quite different in some ways. Raven could fly but Hyena was only able to walk.
One day Hyena, curious to know something about his friend, asked Raven, “What is this white thing which is always below your neck?”
Raven answered, “It is the fatty meat which I usually eat in the sky. I have been eating it for so long now it is stuck on my neck.”On hearing about meat, saliva started pouring out of Hyena’s mouth for he was greedy and he loved meat very much.Hyena really wanted to eat that meat. But how could he reach the meat in the sky if he had no wings to fly?“Please my friend,” he asked Raven, “lend me some feathers so that I can make myself some wings. I really want to be able to fly like you.”
Raven was not mean, so he gave him some feathers. Hyena sewed them together into wings. He fastened them to his body, and tried to take off into the sky. But he was far too heavy for the few feathers to carry him. So he had to think of another plan.
“Please my friend,” he asked Raven, “could I hold onto your tail as you fly up into the sky?”“All right,” said Raven. “I know how much you want to fly. Let’s do it tomorrow morning.”When day came, Hyena took hold of Raven’s tail and Raven flew up into the sky.
Raven flew and flew and flew until he was exhausted. But Hyena said, “Just a little further, my friend!” He could see the white and fatty meat just above them, and his mouth was watering.
When they reached the first piece of fatty meat, Hyena felt a jerk. One of Raven’s tail feathers came off in his hand! Then there was another jerk, and another.
Raven felt much lighter, and the ache in his tail was going. He sang: Raven’s feathers, unpluck yourselves. Raven’s feathers, unpluck yourselves.In response, Hyena sang the opposite: Raven’s feathers hold on, don’t unpluck yourselves. Raven’s feathers hold on, don’t unpluck yourselves.
Finally, the feathers could not hold Hyena anymore. He was in the middle of nowhere in the sky. He jumped onto the fatty meat thinking that as he ate, the fatty meat would hold him. But as he tried to hold and eat the ‘meat’, all he felt was moist cloud!
By now he was falling fast. “Help, help!” he shouted. But no one could hear him. Raven was lost in the clouds.
Hyena fell on the ground with a crash and lay silent for some minutes. He woke up howling in pain, with a broken leg and dark scars all over his body.
From that day to now, Hyena limps and he has many scars on his body. He has never been able to fly. And he and Raven are no longer friends.
"Ammachi! Ammachi! Could we makecoconut barfi today?" Sooraj asked his grandmother."PLEEEEEAASE?"
"Hee hee hee! Only if you help me make it, eh?" replied Ammachi."YAY!"
"Ready?" shouted Sooraj."Ready!" said Ammachi.
"We’ll only pick the ripe ones, okay?                             The ones that are brown all over...                                Watch out! Here they come!"                        WHOOOSH... WHUMP!
"Now to get the husk off…"                                        POTCH! CRAANKK!
Sooraj’sstomach went: "GRRRRRR!" Ammachigiggled.
"Then we  crACK                                             the shell… like THIS!"                                                                                                          KHATAK!
"And grrrrrraaaaate thefrrrrrrrruuuit!"
"Toss it into the pan with all theother ingredients…" "It smells SO good, Ammachi!"
"Then we pour it all out on to atray… Wait for it to cool, baba!"
"Now cut it into                         neat little slices…"                                            SQUEAK                                            SQUEAK
"YIPPEE! Our coconut barfi is ready to be eaten!"                                                                     "YUM YUM YUM!"
Ammachi's barfi was made using SIMPLE MACHINES!  Simplemachines make it easier to do work. There are six kinds of simple machines: 1. Inclinedplane 2. Lever 3. Wheeland Axle
4. Wedge 5. Pulley 6. ScrewCan youidentify the simple machines that Sooraj and Ammachi used in the process ofmaking coconut barfi?
Bunty loves to play with butterflies.
And with birds.
She loves to play with paper boats.
She also likes to make sand castles.
When Bunty goes back home, her mother asks her to clean up. She refuses.
"I hate soap!" she screams.
One night, she has a dream. The germs are all around her castle, and are attacking her.
Bunty is chased by the germs. She runs for her life and screams, "Help. Help!"
Suddenly, Soap King Bubbly appears. "Bunty, don't be afraid," he says. "Go attack the germs!" the Soap King orders his army of bubbles.
The army of bubbles chases the germs away.
These days, Bunty likes to use soap, and she brushes and scrubs herself clean.
One day,  Mr Sloth came to visit. He said:   I'm sleepy! I need a good branch for a bed!
I'm quite good at climbing. I know how to swing.   But sleeping's my favourite,  favourite thing.
This branch looks lovely! I think I'll sleep here.   And you? Don't you think that's a splendid idea?
Oh no,  Mr Sloth! A giraffe's eating there!   He might think you're lunch and start nibbling your hair!
This branch looks lovely! I think I'll sleep here.   And you? Don't you think that's a splendid idea?
Oh no,  Mr Sloth! There's a beehive right there!   You'll never get sleep with those bees everywhere!
This branch looks lovely! I think I'll sleep here.   And you? Don't you think that's a splendid idea?
Oh no,  Mr Sloth,  that's a snake over there!   Not a branch! Poor old snake. You gave him quite a scare.
This branch looks lovely! I think I'll sleep here.   And you? Don't you think that's a splendid idea?
Oh no,  Mr Sloth! There's a bird squawking there!   You'll never get sleep with that noise in the air!
Try climb one more branch,  Mr Sloth! They all said.   And that branch was just the right one for his bed.
The bird and the snake,  the giraffe and each bee   were happy to have Mr Sloth in their tree.
Long time ago,  there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark,  they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said,  "I am a louse. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu."
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate,  drank,  and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left,  they had a bad thought. They said,  "No,  it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse."  Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone,  and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
The battle-weary king led his tired followers to settle on the sandy dunes of the Cape Flats.Majestic Table Mountain tried to protect them from the harsh weather as best she could.
The king's subjects complained bitterly about their new home.They could not bear the scorching summers nor the cold, wet winters. They could not bear the stinging sand and howling wind.
Fynbos and Rooibos were the king's trusted advisors. One day, they approached their king."Everyone suffers living under these difficult conditions. Can we move to a place where life will be easier?" they asked.
King Protea smiled at his advisors and spoke in a gentle voice. "You are loyal and I hear your concerns. However, this is our home. Together we can overcome any difficulty," said the king.
The sun beat down on the kingdom of the Cape Flats. The heat was relentless. A wildfire broke out. Furious winds fanned the raging fire. The flames crept across King Protea's kingdom, destroying everything.
When the fire finally died, it left behind a sad sight that stretched from Hoerikwaggo across the Cape Flats.The landscape lay bare for months. The seasons changed, as seasons do. Winter rains pelted the earth.
Unknown to all, something miraculous was happening under the soil. The seeds that survived the wildfire burst open, ready to grow.With incredible strength, the seedlings grew up towards the light and revealed colourful buds.
The landscape was once again decorated with regal proteas, resilient fynbos and healing rooibos.Plants in the Cape Floral Kingdom continue to thrive in the extreme conditions of the Cape Flats.
Lank, lank gelede was daar 'n leeu wat uit die bos wou kom en 'n mens as 'n vriend wou hè.
And so the lion and the man became friends.
They ate together and shared meat. The lion realised that the man was a meat lover. It began to fear that the man would kill it.
The lion feared that perhaps the man might spear it with his spears. The man feared that the lion might eat him at night when he slept.
One night the man dreamed that the lion was moving towards him slowly,  trying to eat him.
The man took up his spear,  shouting,  "If you want to eat me,  then I will spear you." The lion woke up and ran out,  "I said this man will one day kill me."
From that day,  the lion and the man were no longer friends. The lion will kill a human whenever it finds one. And humans will kill a lion if they can.
My home.
I stay in a house.There is no space for a mouse!
We have two bedrooms and a bathroom.
We have a lounge and a kitchen.
Mom says our home might be small, but we have love for all!
It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School. The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.
In Mr Motaung's shop,  the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside. Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife's homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!
In Mr Mkhize's shop,  the chips are nearly ready,  but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried because things are not going well with his shop. "It started well," thinks Mkhize. "But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I'm reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf."
Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung. He believes that Motaung's kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize's kota.
The queue at Mr Motaung's shop is always longer. Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.
Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. "What are you staring at?" asks Jabu. "Your kota! It looks bigger than mine," says Zodwa.
They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough,  Jabu's is bigger. "Something is not right here," says Zodwa. "I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize's shop is not busy anymore." Jabu thinks for a while and then he replies,  "Well,  I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!"
Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking and she's curious. She asks them what's wrong with cutting the loaf into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together,  "A kota is a quarter of a loaf!" Nomsa still looks confused,  so Zodwa explains,  "The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise,  they are not quarters."
Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. "So,  he is stealing bread from us!" she says in a loud voice. Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize's shop to complain. She marches off,  holding her kota up in the air. Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.
Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren't new customers. "Oh,  hello again kids," he mutters,  "how can I help you?" "Mr Mkhize,  I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter," says Zodwa,  pointing at her kota. "I want a quarter kota or my money back," she adds firmly.
"Is it true Mr Mkhize? You've been cheating us!" cries Nomsa. A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations. Mkhize waves his hands wildly. "What are you saying about me?" he protests. "I'm not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!"
Then Zodwa says quietly,  "We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!" Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.
"OK," he says eventually,  "I will give you your money back. "And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas," speaks up Jabu. Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear,  "I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas."
Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchaar to his kotas. Soon more children were buying from him,  and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.
Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung,  and everyone is happy.
Long,  long ago,  when Zebra's skin was still white,  a terrible drought occurred. For months not a single drop of rain fell. The grass turned dull,  the trees became bare and the rivers dried up one by one. Springbok,  Warthog and Zebra had to walk very far each day in search of water.
One morning when Springbok arrived at the only watering hole,  he heard an angry voice say,  "Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!" Springbok's eyes widened. Baboon was sitting on a rock next to the watering hole,  grilling bananas over his open fire. "But I'm so thirsty,  my tongue feels like biltong," Springbok said. "Where will I find  water?"
After a while Warthog came trotting along. But as soon as he lowered his head to take a sip of water,  he heard an angry voice,  "Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!" Surprised,  Warthog turned around. He saw Baboon sitting on the rock next to the watering hole grilling his bananas.
"But I'm so thirsty,  it feels as if I've eaten dust," Warthog said. "Where will I find water?" Baboon growled. "Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole." Warthog bristled at first,  but when he saw Baboon's long teeth,  he got scared. He turned around and trotted away,  tail in the air.
After a while Zebra turned up at the watering hole. Before he could take a sip of water he heard an angry voice. "Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!" Zebra snorted and looked up. He saw Baboon sitting on the rock grilling his bananas.
"But I'm so thirsty,  it feels as if my tongue slept outside my mouth last night," Zebra said. "Where will I find water?" "Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll!This is Baboon's watering hole." Baboon showed his long teeth. Zebra wasn't scared. With clip-clopping hooves he stormed at baboon. He was so angry that he ran right through Baboon's burning fire. Sparks and smoke and bananas were flying.
Baboon tried to escape,  but it was too late. Zebra kicked him so hard that he flew through the air. "Ouch!" Baboon yelled. His butt landed on a sun baked rock. The rock was so hot that it burned off Baboon's hair. From that day Baboon has never had hair on his butt.
And Zebra's skin has never been lily-white again. Baboon's fire burned stripes onto his skin.
It was now safe for the animals to drink at the watering hole. And each morning,  as they came to drink water,  Springbok,  Warthog and Zebra sang,  "Come wet your throat here while you stroll,  this is everybody's watering hole!"
Lizzy lived next to a busy road. She would often sit outside and watch the activities of the street. Full taxis carried people to work. Children passed on their way to school, and runners jogged past in the evenings.
One day, Lizzy saw two girls on the other side of the road. They wanted to cross and were holding hands for safety. Mamma always told Lizzy, "Before you cross any road, look left, look right, look left again. Check it's safe to go."
Lizzy's eyes got even bigger and her jaw dropped.  She darted into the house.  "Mamma! Mamma! A girl has been bumped by a car!  She is lying outside of our yard and she is not moving!" cried Lizzy.
The worried paramedics placed Mosa carefully on a stretcher, and took her to hospital. After Mosa's accident, the local schools introduced road safety lessons for parents and children.The community petitioned for a pedestrian crossing, so that no more children would be hurt.
Long time ago, there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark, they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said, "I am a louse*. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu**."* A small parasitic insect** A Southern African drink
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate, drank, and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left, they had a bad thought. They said, "No, it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse." Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone, and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
"Oh, no!"
"Lulu, it is time to go," calls Ma.
Where is Lulu?Is she under the sofa?
Is she behind the curtain?
Where is Lulu?Is she next to the stove?
Is she in the cupboard?
"Lulu, it is time to go! Where are you?" calls Ma.
"There you are!" says Ma."I do not want to gooo!"
"We have to go," says Ma."But I really like this one!"
"I really like this one!"
"And this one!"
"And this one!""And that one!"
"See, you return books and borrow more," says Ma."YAY!"
Where is Lulu now?
Wayan lived in a small village by the sea.The people there believed that when you died, you returned to the sea. The sea is a special place where the ancestors live.
Wayan learned to fish just as everything was changing for the fishermen. There were fewer fish, and they were always small. Sometimes, the boats came back empty, even though they had been at sea all day.
One day, while Wayan was fishing, a storm blew over. He was swept into the waves. A turtle saved him. "I am Bintang. I will help you, climb onto my back," said the turtle."Maybe you can help me. My grandfather is very sick and no one knows what to do."
Finally, the thing came out. It was a plastic straw! The straw had stuck down grandfather's throat. Grandfather began to breathe more easily. Bintang said to Wayan, "I will take you to the others."They went to Turtle Hospital. "What happened to these turtles?" asked Wayan.
Wayan promised that he would do his best to help. Bintang carried him back to the shore, and then swam away. Wayan realised that the villagers needed to clean up the sea and beaches. He ran to the elders to tell them about the turtles.
People agreed to a ban on plastic straws, plastic bottles and plastic bags. They agreed to throw their trash into trash bins only, and to stop burning and burying plastic. They decided to stop fishing until the sea was clean.
Eventually, the sea and beaches returned to the way they were before Wayan was born.The water was clean and full of life. People were no longer sick from eating sick fish.Wayan learned that when the sea is polluted, we all suffer. When the sea is healthy, we can all be happy.
One special Friday Yusuf ’s father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woollen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf ’s eyes brighten when Papa says, “Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you.”
A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer’s Corner.Gulls circle the sky. “Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” they cry. “What will you bring back for Yusuf?”Papa rings his bell. “Wait and see what it will be!”
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf ’s grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa’s arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple.Papa sings as he works: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf ’s father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls. “What will you do to help the turtles?”Papa said, “We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one.”
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. Mother wants a new dress.“Don’t be silly,” says Ouma. “You’ll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There’s not so many fish left in the sea.”Yusuf holds Ouma’s hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. “What is for supper?”
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls.“There’s enough sea for everybody,” said Yusuf ’s father. He showed them the fishing licence that had been Oupa Salie’s. “Waves for all. Water for free.”
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What will Yusuf ’s father bring from the ocean?”
Yusuf’s father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf’s father untangles the nets, singing to the shark: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa’s finger.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What did you bring back for Yusuf?”As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. “A lucky shark tooth for my boy.”At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
1-2-3-4Wash and help and wash some more.
5-6-7-8Hello, friend! I'll give you space.
9-10-11-12Keep those germs to yourself!
13-14-15-16Elbow bumps are the new "thing".
17-18-19-20We wear our masks, though they feel funny.
Sing this song with all your heart. Kids who care all do their part!
Once upon a time, Eagle and Hen were best friends. The two of them were together and chatted from morning till dusk. Eagle's chickens couldn't wait to visit Hen's chickens and play with them.
One day Hen approached Eagle. "My friend," she said. "I have to ask you a big favour. Rooster's pyjama pants are torn. He is really grumpy about it. They are his favourite pants. I want to mend the pants, but I don't have a needle. May I borrow your needle?" Eagle nodded. "Of course, dear friend," she said. "But please take good care of it. It is an heirloom needle. My grandmother gave it to me." "Of course, my friend," Hen said. She took the shining needle. "I'll return it tomorrow."
Hen went away to mend her husband's pants. The next morning, as usual, Hen was on her way to Eagle. But oh, goodness – the needle was gone! Hen anxiously called her little chicks together. "Has anyone seen Eagle's needle?" she asked. "No, Mommy," the chickens cheeped. "Help me look for it," Hen said.
Hen and her chickens looked everywhere. In every bush. Behind every lump of grass. Inside all their nests. But Eagle's needle was gone.
"And where is the needle you borrowed from me?" Eagle asked. Hen swallowed. "Oh, Eagle I am so sorry. I lost your needle." "Lost it?" Eagle was angry. "Don't worry," Hen said quickly. "My chickens and I will find it. It must be here somewhere."
Look carefully when you see Hen and her chickens again. Up until this day they are still scratching around in the dust, looking for Eagle's needle. And when Hen notices an eagle flying in the air, she anxiously clucks: "Quick, little chicks. Hide beneath my wings. If Eagle sees you, she will catch you. She is still annoyed about her grandmother's needle."
My heart feels alot of things.
I feel happy whenmy granny tells us stories in the evening.
I feel silly whenI play with my friend.
I feel bad whenmy dad says he does not have money.
I feel loved whenmy mom gives me a hug.
On Sunday, Jimmy Zogba scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your zebra hair? Your hair’s so plain, like you don’t care.”
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your fake tattoo? Your skin’s so boring. You are too.”
“Hey, Rafiki, where’s your bling? Your teeth are wonky, that’s the thing.”
That day, Rafiki walked home slowly.
“Auntie, can I have zebra hair?” “I can’t cut you zebra hair. Actually, I wouldn’t dare.”
“My skin’s so boring, Sisi. Can you make a fake tattoo?”“You don’t need one to look like you.”
“Mkhulu, I wish I had some bling.” “Bling, my child, don’t mean a thing.”
The next weekend, Santi Ramires scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
“Hey, Rafiki! Looking fine!”
Rafiki shrugged. “I look like me; this style is mine.”
Basetsana Makgalemele was born in Soweto. She was her parents' third daughter. They named her Basetsana, which means "girls." In Tswana culture, calling your daughter that means your next child will be a boy. This actually happened. Her parents' next child was a boy. Her parents,  big sisters and younger brother all called her Bassie for short.
When she was a child,  Bassie was very shy. She liked to sing and dance in her room on her own. One day at school netball practice,  the coach told two girls to pick teams. Bassie stood on the edge of the field hoping someone would say,  "Come play with us!" But nobody wanted her on their team. Little did they know,  Bassie would become one of the most popular girls in the country.
On weekends, Bassie and her brother and sisters helped their teacher mom and bus driver dad to pay the bills. They made sandwiches to sell at local soccer matches. They tried to sell everything as fast as they could so they had time to play with the other children when the game was over.
By the time Bassie turned 16,  she was a beautiful young woman. She was so beautiful that she won two beauty competitions in one year: Miss Soweto and Miss Black South Africa.   But Bassie was not only beautiful on the outside. She was also beautiful on the inside. She cared about the community where she grew up.
Bassie was very smart. She worked hard at school, especially on her favourite subject: science. Her hard work was rewarded when she was the top science student at her school in matric. That's not all,  she was also Head Girl. The shy little girl was now one of the most popular girls in school.
Bassie's father always encouraged his children to read. He gave her a book called The Power of Positive Thinking. From that book, she learnt that being optimistic is the key to making your dreams a reality. She dreamt of winning the Miss South Africa beauty competition. In 1994, that dream come true! She was also crowned First Princess in the Miss World competition.
Bassie's mother was her role model. Bassie described her mom as a "fierce,  hardworking Xhosa woman who did not suffer fools." She was a teacher and Bassie had plans to follow in her footsteps,  but things don't always go as planned! After winning Miss South Africa,  she became a TV presenter. She worked hard and her career in TV led to her opening her own television production company. Basetsana was now also a successful business woman.
Bassie's motto is: "To whom much is given,  much is expected." She believes that you are given a gift so that you can give to others. Bassie does this by volunteering,  giving of her time and money and even creating jobs. She is involved with projects and charities to help people in her community. One that is very close to her heart is the Nelson Mandela Institute.
Bassie had a very close relationship with Nelson Mandela. When she was crowned Miss South Africa,  Madiba wrote her a letter of congratulations. In the letter,  he called her "our Queen." They shared a passion for children and education and the belief that an educated nation can help fight poverty.
Basetsana married Romeo Kumalo and became known as Basetsana Kumalo. Together they established the Romeo & Basetsana Kumalo Family Foundation. The foundation looks after orphans.
Bassie has had to learn to balance her busy work and family life. She has her own company called Basetsana Women Investment Holdings. She and Romeo have three children,  two boys and a girl. Bassie sees her role as mother to her children as her "highest calling and greatest privilege."
Bassie says the secret to her success is "courage,  determination,  passion and staying committed to the course." Despite all her success,  she remains humble while trying to make the world a better place. Being beautiful on the outside is not what makes you a beautiful person. It's a heart filled with love and generosity. And that's why Basetsana is our beautiful Queen.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
Once upon a time, there were four friends and they decided to do a toy race.
﻿                  Rani has a shiny green car.         Pihu has a black and yellow auto.
﻿               ﻿Rohit has big red bus.      Aman has long blue lorry.
On your marks, get set, ready....  Go!!!!Here comes Lucky- the dog, joining the race.....
﻿ ﻿﻿Everybody staring at Lucky...                   The fastest of all..                         And so the winner is our Lucky!!!!
One day, Nakehi and his wife went to visit Nipapariya and his wife.
When the couple arrived,  Nipapariya and his wife graciously welcomed them.
They killed a chicken and cooked it.
And they all ate together.
The next week, Nipapariya and his wife went to visit Nakehi and his wife.
When they arrived, Nakehi was not at home.
He had gone out to set a trap to catch a francolin.
When Nakehi returned, he saw his friends. He was so happy.
He went to see what his wife was cooking.
She was cooking beans.
He kicked over the beans and stormed out of the house.
He told his friends about a trap that he had set near a nest of francolin eggs.
As they were talking, Nakehi heard the sound of a francolin calling. The call told him something.
The bird was caught in the trap!
Nakehi jumped up, put his knife in his belt, and ran off to catch the francolin.
Trembling with excitement, he grabbed the francolin in one hand.
With his other hand he gathered up the eggs.
Nakehi headed home, full of pride.
But as he walked, his knife was cutting away at his belt.
Proudly Nakehi walked up to his house.
At that moment, his belt snapped and his loincloth fell to his ankles.
He tried to grab the cloth but let go of the bird.
The francolin flew away. The eggs lay broken on the ground.
Nipapariya and his wife laughed and laughed.
Then they all ate what was left of the beans.
On Sunday,  Jimmy Zogba scored the winning goal.
On Monday,  the Cool Cat Crew strutted by.
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your zebra hair? Your hair's so plain, like you don't care."
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your fake tattoo? Your skin's so boring. You are too."
"Hey, Rafiki, where's your bling? Your teeth are wonky,  that's the thing."
That day, Rafiki walked home slowly.
"Auntie, can I have zebra hair?" "I can't cut you zebra hair. Actually,  I wouldn't dare."
"My skin's so boring, Sisi. Can you make a fake tattoo?" "You don't need one to look like you."
"Mkhulu, I wish I had some bling." "Bling,  my child,  don't mean a thing."
The next weekend, Santi Ramires scored the winning goal.
On Monday, the Cool Cat Crew strutted by. "Hey, Rafiki! Looking fine!"
Rafiki shrugged. "I look like me; this style is mine."
Chunu and Munu are walking.They reach the corn field.
Their daddy is in the field.He is sowing corn.
“Can we help you?” the girls ask.
Father looks at Chunu. Then he looks at Munu.
"Okay," Daddy says.“Come and help me.”
Chunu and Munu are happy. They water the corn.
Weeks later, the corn begins to sprout.The girls cheer and smile.
They weed the corn.It is growing so well!
A few weeks later...Chunu says, “Look at the weeds!”Munu says, “Look at the grass.”
Chunu pulls out the weeds.Munu pulls out the grass.
The corn crop is happy.
Chunu picks the cobs.Munu puts them in a basket.
The basket is full of corn!The girls carry it all the way home.
Daddy roasts the corn.Chunu and Munu eat it happily.
Chunu and Munu cheer,“The corn is yummy.Very yummy!”
﻿A fawn was zooming in a race through the forest.
He ran past the rabbit with ease.
He even flew past the big-big elephant.
He jumped over the stream feeling refreshed by the cold water.
He ran past the crumbling wall.
In excitement, he didn't pay attention to where he was running and missed the large boulder. He stumbled and fell.
﻿He got hurt very badly in his leg and couldn't get up.
The monkey massaged his leg. Tears flowed from the fawn's eyes. He couldn't bear the pain.
Brother Bear picked him up and called his mother.
His mother came. She said, “Look, we’ll beat up this bad boulder!”
The fawn said, “Oh, don’t do that or he will also get hurt and start crying.” His mother laughed. So did he.
Once upon a time, Lion was the strongest and most feared of all the animals. He would catch other animals and eat them. But one morning while he was looking for his breakfast, he got caught in a hunter's trap.
Lion gave his loudest roar. He pulled and pulled to free himself from the trap. The trap got tighter and tighter around his leg every time he pulled. Lion grew tired and he felt more pain in his leg. Finally, he gave up.
Days went past as Lion lay baking in the sun. He was hungry and thirsty and there was nobody to save him. He became weaker and weaker. "I am going to die of hunger and thirst in this trap," he thought to himself.
One morning, Lion heard a sound coming from the nearby bushes. He listened and looked closer. He saw Warthog walking with his family, talking and laughing. The warthogs were going to the river to drink water and play in the mud before the sun got too hot.
"Warthog! Please help me! Warthog!" cried Lion. "Please set me free from this trap," he pleaded. "Never," said Warthog. "You are a cruel animal. You will eat me and my family for breakfast if I set you free." Lion replied, "I promise I would never do such a bad thing. We will be friends if you can set me free."
Warthog felt sorry for Lion. "I do not like seeing you in such pain, thirsty and dying from hunger," he said. So he pulled at the trap with his long strong tusks and released Lion. Warthog saved his new friend.
"Thank you for saving my life," said Lion. "I must go to my family now,  good bye." Warthog replied, "Go well my friend." He was happy that Lion was his friend. "My family will never have to run from Lion again," he thought.
Lion walked away limping and weak. He was also very hungry. Then he saw Warthog's children playing in the mud. "Today is my lucky day," said Lion with his mouth watering.
"Warthog, my new friend," called Lion. "I have been caught in the trap for days without food. I am too weak to hunt. Please would you give one of your children to me for breakfast?" Warthog was shocked. "I saved you from the trap and now you want to eat my children?"
"I am very sorry my friend," said Lion, "but I am starving. I might be weak right now,  but I am still stronger than you." Lion opened his mouth and showed his strong teeth. "If you do not give me one of your children, I will take one for myself," he roared.
Warthog knew that he did not have the speed or the strength of Lion. He would never be able to protect his children in a fight. "All right," agreed Warthog. "I will give you one of my children. But first I want you to show me how you were caught in the trap. In case I have to save another lion from such a trap."
Lion imagined the wonderful taste of young warthog in his mouth. He could hardly wait. He went back to the trap and put his foot inside, to show his friend how he was trapped.
"Ouch!" Lion roared. Warthog had closed the trap on Lion's foot. "Aha! I got you," said Warthog. "You will stay in that trap hungry and thirsty again. See if your strong teeth and sharp claws can help you now."
"Run! Run! Run away!" Warthog's wife shouted to the children at the top of her voice. "Raise your tails when you are running so that your father can see you," she called. The babies ran as fast as they could through the bushes.
"Warthog please help me!" begged Lion again. He was in pain from the trap. "I will do anything for you if you save me," he cried. "No way, liar! I will never believe you again," shouted Warthog. "I will also warn other animals not to save you because you are very sly."
Warthog saw his children running in a row with their mother. Their tails were lifted up for him to see them. He rushed to his family and they all escaped safely. To this day, warthogs always run with their tails lifted up to see that everyone is safe.
Come back, cat! Play with me.
Sit in your basket. Stay right here!
Come back, cat! That’s way too high.
Come back, cat! Don’t go outside.
Come back, cat! That’s not yours.
Come back, cat. What have you got?
Come back, cat.  That’s not your friend!
Hello, cat! Are you back?
Stay in your basket. It’s nap time now.
Cat?
I read with friends.
I read on my own.
I learn to write numbers.
I learn to write letters.
I draw pictures.
I play football with friends.
I sing at school.
I dance at school.
I garden with the teacher and friends.
We eat at school.
We rest, while teacher sings.
What do you do at school?
Did you know, when you eat fruits you are eating colours?
What colour is an apple? Eat all types of apples.Eat green, red, yellow and pink apples!
What colour is a coconut?Eat every type of coconut.Eat fresh coconut and dried coconut.
What fruits are the colour orange?When is an orange the colour green?
Watermelon is pink.Pink is my favourite fruit!You eat colours, when you eat fruits.
An avocado is a fruit with only one large seed.What colour are you eating when you eat an avocado?
What colours are these peppers?Every kind of pepper is a fruit.Fruits are different to vegetables.
Fruits grow from flowers on a plant. Fruits have seeds.Which fruits do you like to eat?
I wake up at night feeling thirsty. I want to get some water. I start looking for my slippers under the bed.
Oh my God! There is a tiger under my bed.
Now what should I do?
Should I call Ma? What if the tiger roars?
Should I just go back to sleep? But I am not sleepy any more.
Then someone turns on the light. Ma is standing at the door.
“What happened dear?Did you call me?” asks Ma.
I point towards the tiger. Ma bends and pulls the tiger out from under the bed!
Hey, this is no tiger. This is my thick yellow and black sweater. Its buttons shine like a tiger's eyes.
I got scared for nothing!Ma gets me some water.
Now I will sleep. And dream about real tigers in a jungle!
Simamkele loves dolls. Mama buys him lots. They keep his loneliness away. Sima's favourite doll is Siza. Sima wants to be a nurse when he grows up.
He loves to put on Mama's skirt, and twirl. Like magic, he suddenly becomes Sima the nurse.He plays hospital-hospital and makes sickly Siza and all his dolls better.
Wherever Sima is, Siza is there too.
But Sima's friends do not like Siza. One day, they took him away and stuck his head in the toilet.
When Papa came home, Sima was nursing Siza. "What are you doing?" asked Papa. "I'm being a nurse," said Sima. "Will you play with me?" "Yes. But we will go to the park and play soccer," said Papa.
His friends saw Sima and Papa playing soccer. They joined in. Sima and Papa often play soccer now. But they still haven't played with dolls.
One day, Sima was playing hospital-hospital with his dolls. He heard Mama shout. "Sima! Run! Papa is waiting to play with you at the park."
"Why on earth are you wearing a dress?" said Papa in an angry voice. Just then a ball flew out of nowhere and.
Knocked Papa down. Everyone panicked. Except Sima. He knelt and tied his blanket around Papa's bleeding head. "Call an ambulance!" he shouted.
"He needs stiches in his head. You did just the right thing," said the nurse. Sima was proud.
"You're a hero. You'll make a great doctor one day." "But I want to be a nurse, just like you," said Sima.
"Thank you, Nurse Sima," said Papa. Now Sima and Papa play hospital-hospital and soccer – and his friends do too.
Once upon a time, there was a farmer and his wife who had one child. Their child was a boy called Kisirusiru, which means, one who behaves foolishly.
One day, as Kisirusiru took the goats out, a goat's horn tore his shirt. His mother sent him to the shop to buy a needle so that she could mend his shirt. Kisirusiru bought the needle and put it in the pocket of his shirt.
As he was going home, he saw boys playing football and he joined them. The needle fell out of his pocket and was lost. When he reached home he told his mother what had happened. "My child," said his mother, "next time put the needle in a piece of paper." "Yes mother, I understand," replied Kisirusiru.
The next day, the boy picked up a pot to go and fetch water. After he had filled the pot he remembered what his mother said. So he wrapped the pot in a piece of paper to carry it home. But on the way, the paper got torn. The pot fell and broke into pieces, spilling all the water.
The goat kicked and scratched Kisirusiru's head. Soon blood was trickling down his face. "When will you stop your stupidity?" shouted his father. "Goats are tied and pulled with ropes! Behave properly or you'll have to leave my house."
The next day, the man sent his son to buy meat at the market. Remembering what his father said, Kisirusiru tied a rope around the meat. He pulled it home. He ran very fast so he did not to keep his father waiting. Imagine how the meat looked when it reached home!
His father was so angry that he told Kisirusiru to pack his things and leave. When his mother heard this, she decided to leave with her son. They took the kitchen door with them, so that they would have something to start building a new house.
They had walked for quite a while but could not find anywhere to build their new house. When it became dark, they decided to climb up a tree to sleep. They pulled up the door and their belongings with them.
They had just climbed the tree when they heard noises from below. They saw three men with sacks. They looked dangerous. Kisirusiru and his mother were so scared that they let go of their belongings. The door crashed to the ground. The men got such a fright that they ran away, leaving the sacks behind.
Kisirusiru and his mother climbed down the tree. They opened the men's sacks. Inside they found money, clothes, blankets, and other things they needed to set up house. They soon found a place to build themselves a new house. They lived happily ever after.
My mother planted.She planted a small garden.She planted a small garden of peas.
My father planted. He planted a small garden.  He planted a small garden of flowers.
My mother weeded in both gardens.
My father watered in both gardens.
My parents and I worked in the small gardens.My sister and I  harvested the flowers and peas.
The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.
There are many ways to travel. Which shall I choose?
Should I use a plane?
Planes fly very high. I am afraid of flying!
Perhaps I should use a helicopter?
But helicopters and planes are the same!
Should I perhaps use a train?
But the train station is very far.
Or,  perhaps,  I should use a bus?
Our village has only one bus!
Perhaps I shall use a lorry to travel.
But lorries are used for carrying heavy luggage.
Should I use a bicycle to travel?
But will my father give me his bicycle?
Perhaps I will try to use a boat?
But I do not trust boats very much!
Aah! I know what I shall use! I shall use a tractor to travel.
I have many friends.....
My some friends are elder than me and....
some are younger than me......
And my some friends are aged like my grand father....
And some are children too....
And some friends are such who have a tail......
And some are such who doesn't have legs.....
And some are such who even fly.....
Ohhhhhh Even books are my friends......
But do you know who is my best friend.... Who??? Who???? Who????
My MOM!!!!!
'Wov! What a lovely raincoat!' Mannu danced happily holding the shining red raincoat that his parents had bought for him.'Mamma, may I wear the raincoat now?' Manu asked his mother.Mamma said, 'No, my child. You can wear it when it rains. It should start raining soon. But as of now I don't see any signs of the rain.'
But, Monday was a bright sunny day, full of golden sunshine.Mannu looked out of the window every now and then and asked his mother,'Mamma, will it rain today?'Mamma  peeped out of the window and said, ' I don't think it will rain today. You cannot wear the raincoat today. People will laugh at you, if you do.'
On Tuesday also Mannu kept looking at the sky. And the raincoat was kept right next to him, ready to be used. But the sky was a nice blue and as bright as it was on Monday.Mannu was disappointed,'Mamma, when will I be able to use the raincoat?''There is just a single cloud in the sky today, and that too a white one. I don't think you will get a chance to wear the raincoat today.'Mamma said.
Wednesday again was a very hot sunny day.Mannu was getting worried, 'Mamma, why is it not raining yet?'He tried to put the raincoat on at home. But had to immediately take it off because he felt too hot in it.Mamma, in her eagerness to comfort him said, 'I think it will rain soon, probably by afternoon.'
On Thursday, there was the school picnic. Mannu was eager to show off the raincoat to his school buddies.'Mamma, shall I carry the raincoat to the picnic. What if it rains there?' Mannu asked.'Don't, my pet. It will not rain today. See those white clouds? And they are also so far away.' Mamma tried to comfort him.
And... at last  on Friday, the sky looked quite dark with black clouds. Mannu kept the raincoat ready at hand.'Mamma, it will rain today, right mamma?' Mannu asked excitedly. The peacock also seemed to think so and started dancing. The tortoise came out of it's hiding and looked up at the sky hoping perhaps to feel cooler after the hot summer.'I think so. Today the sky is full of black clouds.' Mamma smiled at Mannu's excitement and was happy for him.
On the Saturday morning there was a loud thunder.  And also lightening.'Mamma, it that not lightening? Now it will surely rain, right Mamma?' asked Manu.He ran out on the lawns and saw that a frog and a tortoise also had come out of their hiding.
And.. tip...tap...tip...tap... came down the raindrops!Mannu, loved the rains...raincoat or no raincoat.'Oh, it is raining; it is raining.' Thus shouting  Mannu ran out of the house and started  jumping and dancing in the rain. And he had the company of the frog who also seemed to be  waiting for the rains.
'Wait Mannu, wait.' Mamma ran after him with his raincoat in her hand. 'You forgot your raincoat!'But Mannu was very happy getting drenched in rains. The raincoat which he was holding close to himself all this time was all forgotten.
This is Ndalo.
Ndalo likes to read books.
This is Pendo.
Pendo likes to eat carrots.
Ndalo grazes Pendo after school.
He gives fresh water to Pendo.
Father gives grain to Pendo.
He milks Pendo every day.
Pendo gives a lot of milk.
Father sells Pendo's milk.
Ndalo drinks fresh milk every day.
He says, "Thank you Pendo!"
Chicken and Millipede were very close friends. In some ways they were very similar; they both loved sport and were very competitive. But in other ways they were very different. Millipede loved to joke around and make people laugh. She was able to do many things at once, juggling tasks with her many legs. Chicken was more serious. She was good at taking others under her wing and making them feel safe and cared for. But she also had a terrible temper!
One day they decided to play a friendly game of soccer. Chicken was a fast runner and an excellent dribbler. She also had a powerful kick and could score goals from far away. But Millipede had something Chicken could never compete with - hundreds of legs! Millipede ran circles around poor Chicken, scoring goal after goal. Chicken got angrier and angrier. Watch out, Millipede!
"Let's have a penalty shoot-out," said Chicken, hoping that this would prevent Millipede from using her legs to dribble around her."Sure thing!" said Millipede confidently.First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede juggled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. Millipede tapped the ball and scored.Chicken grew angrier by the minute. "This is unfair," she thought, "Millipede should only be able to use two of her legs. She is cheating!"While Chicken was busy thinking her angry thoughts, Millipede slyly kicked the ball around her and through the goalposts. Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she had lost."I want a rematch," she demanded, "and this time you can only use two of your legs!"Millipede started laughing because her friend was making such a fuss. "What a sore loser you are!" she said, "Why didn't you use your wings to flap the ball into the goal, or your feathers to blow it over my head? You lost fair and square, my friend!"
"You see," said Millipede, "soccer is really all about strategy. You need to use your brain and have a plan.""Are you telling me I don't have any brains?" shrieked Chicken. "How dare you!"But before Millipede could answer, Chicken opened up her beak and swallowed her.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Usually Chicken loved to see her friend's mother. Mother Millipede told wonderful stories and baked the most delicious leaf cakes. But today Chicken marched right on, hoping Mother Millipede would not recognize her."Hello dear," Mother Millipede called, “Have you seen my child?” Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried. "Chicken is acting very strangely!" she thought.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. “Help me, Mom!” cried the voice. Mother Millipede looked  around and listened carefully. "Where is that voice coming from?" she asked. "Have you got someone inside your stomach, Chicken?"Chicken looked around sheepishly. She didn't know what to do."Who have you eaten?" asked Mother Millipede. "Don't tell me you've eaten my precious baby!"
Mother Millipede shouted, “Use your special power my child!”Millipedes can make a badsmell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill."I don't feel so well," she moaned. "I need to go home and lie in my bed."
Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed.  Millipede tasted disgusting!Meanwhile, Mother Millipede stood beside her, cheering. "Well done, my darling!" she shouted, "Keep on working that special magic! You'll be out in no time."
Chicken coughed and coughed until Millipede came out. "Hooray!" shouted Millipede, "I'm free! I escaped!"Mother Millipede was relieved to see her child alive and well. "Come quickly," she whispered, and her and Millipede crawled quickly away. They climbed and climbed until they reached the top of a tall tree where they could hide.
From that time on, all chickens and millipedes have been enemies.
One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi’s cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”Her stomach growled when the baby’s powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life.
One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter.What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.
Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong.Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed.She taught them to sing: “Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers.He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, “You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back.”Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi’s broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers.How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father’s face.
On her sixth birthday she went to school. “You must choose an English name,” said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. “Why do I need a new name?” she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: “Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna.” What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn’t mess with.When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, “You have a big job, my blessing.”At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.
Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride.Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, “You must apply, my clever friend.” “What is the prize?” asked Albertina, growing curious.“A scholarship to high school!” said Betty. “You must apply. You’ll win it, for sure.”
Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.The test began. Albertina’s fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. “Well done, Albertina!” said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. “Well done to Albertina for full marks,” he said, “but you are too old. The scholarship goes to…”Albertina tried not to cry. “That’s unfair,” shouted Betty, hopping with fury. “That wasn’t in the rules!” How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home.The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn’t like the story one bit either.
Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached.She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse’s silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground.
School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty’s back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons.In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? “But nuns earn no salary,” said Father Bernard. “Perhaps you should become a nurse? You’ll be paid while you study.”
Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse.Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.
Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina’s eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children.Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men’s Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina’s long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation.Max had his mother’s black button eyes and his father’s round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. “How rude you are!” she said, “trampling mud inside my home.”In the morning Albertina’s favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover.She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police.
She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, “Wathint’ abafazi; wathint’ imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!”Many hard years followed after Walter’s arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: “Be strong, little one. Winter’s not long. Be brave, little one. Together we’re strong!”
Circle the Lion lives in the world of circles.
He drinks from the round waterhole.He plays with round stones.He sleeps under round rocks. He dreams about round friends.
Circle the Lion feels alone in his round world.He leaves his round home to find a similar friend, a friend that looks like him.
Behind the big round bush, he finds a new world.
One animal sits in front of a house.Circle the Lion: “Hello, where am I?”Cat: “Hi, this is our world full of triangles.”Circle the Lion: “Really, nothing is round?”Cat: “No, we love our angles. Look, we all have three angles.
Circle the lion enters the new world. Even from far away, he can already see a lot of animals. He is very excited.
Circle the Lion: “Where am I?”Elephant: “Hi, this is our world of rectangles.”Circle the Lion: “Really, nothing is round?”Giraffe: “No, we love our angles. Look, we all have four angles.”
Circle the Lion sadly walks away. He leaves sad triangles and rectangles behind.
He has no idea where to find a round friend.Tired from his search he takes a break under a tree.
Leopard: “Yoohoo, who are you? What are you doing?”Circle the Lion: “I am Circle the Lion. I am looking for a round friend to play with. But I only found triangles and rectangles. Can you help me?”
Leopard: “I have a lot of circles on my fur. Can we play together?”Circle the Lion: “Oh, good idea! You look like a perfect round friend.”Circle the Lion and the leopard with his circles play together for a long time.
One day they get a little bored. They have only each other and only circles to play with.Leopard: “It would be fun to play with others.”Circle the Lion: “Do you remember what I told you about the other worlds?“
The leopard writes an invitation to all shapes.
All animals with different shapes come to the party.Mouse: “Hey Circle the lion, look what we found out! We can also be a circle.”Snake: “I can be a circle too.”Circle the Lion: “Oh wow, that is so cool.”
I love my neighborhood. Every Saturday my Mom and I take a walk to buy our food.
Our first stop is at Mr Feb's fruit stall.I love watermelons.  Mom always buy a watermelon for me.
Our next stop is the food stall.  Mom and I order fish.
The people at the market are so friendly.
Once upon a time, there was a beautiful bird that loved to sing.
It woke up every morning at sunrise and sang sweetly through the woods.
All animals wondered where this sweet music came from.
Because the bird was shy, it hid and no one knew who it was.
One day, all the animals planned to wake up before sunrise.
They wanted to find the source of this sweet music.
When the sun begun to rise in the morning, the bird started to sing.
Everyone came out from hiding and applauded the bird as soon as it had finished singing.
The beautiful bird became the chief entertainer of the whole village from then on.
One special Friday Yusuf ’s father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woollen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. Yusuf ’s eyes brighten when Papa says, “Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you.”
A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer’s Corner.Gulls circle the sky. “Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” they cry. “What will you bring back for Yusuf?”Papa rings his bell. “Wait and see what it will be!”
The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. Yusuf ’s grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.
The boat rides into the waves. Papa’s arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple.Papa sings as he works: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.
Some days Yusuf ’s father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls. “What will you do to help the turtles?”Papa said, “We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one.”
Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes. He sings the song as he cycles home. “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”
Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. Mother wants a new dress.“Don’t be silly,” says Ouma. “You’ll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There’s not so many fish left in the sea.”Yusuf holds Ouma’s hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. “What is for supper?”
Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cried the gulls.“There’s enough sea for everybody,” said Yusuf ’s father. He showed them the fishing licence that had been Oupa Salie’s. “Waves for all. Water for free.”
Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds. Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What will Yusuf ’s father bring from the ocean?”
Yusuf’s father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves. Yusuf’s father untangles the nets, singing to the shark: “Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don’t you stop.”When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.
The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa’s finger.“Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?” cry the gulls. “What did you bring back for Yusuf?”As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. “A lucky shark tooth for my boy.”At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.
Amara was walking through the park. The trees in the park were green and healthy. But, there was one tree that was brown and dry.
"This tree needs water," said Amara to herself.She watered the tree and it came to life with new growth.It was a magnificent green tree.
Then, the tree spoke! "You watered me and brought me back to life," said the tree."I'm a magic tree, I shall grant you three wishes."
Amara made her first wish."I wish for a red bicycle," she said cautiously.Abracadabra! A red bicycle appeared.
She made her second wish after thinking for a few moments."I wish for a radio," said Amara. Abracadabra! A radio appeared.
Amara made her third wish."I wish for pink crystal earrings," she said happily.Abracadabra! Pink crystal earrings appeared.
The magic tree said, "You have everything that you wanted."Amara smiled, "Yes I do, but those things were not for me." The magic tree looked confused.
"The bicycle is for my older brother. He outgrew his bicycle. The radio is for Dad. His radio broke. The earrings are for Mum. She loves fancy earrings," explained Amara."And they will all share with me!" she added.
