Today is Nin's first day of school.
But Nin can't put on her uniform by herself!
She runs to her mother for help.
“Mama, will you help me put on my uniform?” asks Nin.“I will help you when I finish cooking,” says Ma.
Nin runs outside to find someone else who can help.
“Papa, will you help me put on my uniform?” asks Nin.
“I will help you when I finish feeding the ducks,” says Papa.
“Grandpa, will you help me put on my uniform?” asks Nin.
“I am taking the cattle to the field.
I’ll help you when I come back,” says Grandpa.
“Grandma, will you help me put on my uniform?” asks Nin.
“I will help you once I finish sweeping leaves from the yard,” says Grandma.
“Brother Lah!
Will you help me put on my uniform?” asks Nin.
“I'll help you when I finish drawing water from the well,” says Brother Lah.
No one can help me, thinks Nin sadly.
Everyone is so busy!
Nin decides to put on her uniform herself.
First, it's inside-out.Then, the back is in the front!
And then, Nin tries to put on her shoes.
Nin looks in the mirror.
Oh no!
Her uniform is all wrong!
Her family looks at her and giggles.“I will help you,” says Ma.“We will also help you!” say Brother Lah and Papa.
Now, Nin is finally ready for school.Have a great first day, Nin!
You have never met such a clever dog as Heidi.
She thinks that she is a human.
When I brush my teeth, she also wants me to brush her teeth.
When I am watching television, she moves her eyes.
It is as if she understands everything on the screen.
One night, we were watching a soccer match.
There was a knock on the door.
It was my friend, Mmapula.
It was good to see her.
We greeted each other in excitement.
But, Mmapula didn't greet Heidi.
I forgot to introduce them!
Heidi was used to being greeted by someone shaking her paw.
She was very annoyed.
We went to sit.
But before I could offer Mmapula a chair, she sat down on Heidi's chair!
The dog could not take this nonsense.
But she did not give me a chance to speak.
In a blink of an eye, Heidi had jumped on Mmapula's lap.
She barked at Mmapula, staring her in the eyes.
Heidi was fierce!
Mmapula was in a dilemma.
I acted quickly, and removed Heidi from her lap.
But from that day, Mmapula never again set foot in my house.
A rat has entered the house.
Grandma was the first to see it.
"Rat!"
He jumped on the sofa as he shouted.
The little pillows in it all fell down.
"Where?"
Dad climbed out the window as he heard that.
The curtains all fell down as he pulled.
"There!"
Mom jumped on the table shouting.
The plates in it fell down and broke.
﻿"Catch the mouse," Mithun looked at the cat and shouted.
The cat saw the mouse, then ran away and crawled under the bed.
"Rat!"
Mithun ran after the cat shouting.
"I will chase away that rat," said the mother boldly.
He took a broom and stabbed here and there.
"You're a rat," Dad shouted.
Mom saw the rat and he too hid under the cot.
"I know how to get rid of this rat!"
Grandma jumped down from the sofa.
He rolled up a newspaper and stabbed it here and there.
"Rat!"
Said Dad.
He climbed a little further up the window.
"Left with you!"
Grandma looked at the mouse.
He too ran and hid under the bed.
"Damn!"
Said Dad.
He could not climb above it.
Slowly descended from the window.
He hid under the bed without catching the mouse's eye!
“Rat!
Rat!
” That everyone shouted together.
Papa woke up to that noise.
She sat up in bed and rubbed her eyes gently.
Um, of course, yes, I know this, why it's something known in advance.
It had two eyes, four legs, and a long tail.
"Rat!"
Papa clapped his hands happily.
Papa looked at the rat and the rat started to run.
Papa also ran backwards!
Climb on the sofa, jump out the window, jump on the table, roll on the pillows ...
... slipped between the curtains, stumbled on the plates, and ran out the door!
Not here, not there.Where have you gone?
Not on the sofa.Not under the cot.
Not in the box.Not under my sister's frock.
Not under the pillow.Not in my bag.Sob, sob, where have you gone?
I have looked in every room, l have looked under every book.
I have looked under the chair,I have looked under the stool.Where have you gone?
Soon granny came back from her walk.
"Look what I found in the park."
"It can sway, it can bounce.It can spin, it can dangle.Ha-ha, hee-hee," said Granny with a giggle.
Oh Granny!
Thank you so much!You have found my dear yo-yo!
"Yo-yo?
What a funny name!What a funny toy!I want to play with it,It gives me so much joy!"
Giggle, giggle, giggling away,Granny played, with my little toy.For the rest of the day!
Feet
Legs
Knees
Waist
Belly
Chest
Hands
Arms
Elbows
Head
Yay!
It is bathtime for Chunnu and Munnu,Today, Mama singsa new rhyme for Chunnu and MunnuLa la la la...
It is bathtime for Chunnu and Munnu,Mama washes all thedirt off Chunnu and MunnuScrub-a-dub-a-dub…
It is bathtime for Chunnu and Munnu,Soap bubbles andfun for Chunnu and MunnuThup!
Thup!
Thup!
It is bathtime for Chunnu and Munnu,Mama runs to catchnaughty Chunnu and MunnuHa ha ha ha…
Bath time isover for Chunnu and Munnu,Mama hugsclean-clean Chunnu and MunnuMmmmm…
Bath time isover for Chunnu and Munnu,But tying up pyjamas is hard for Chunnu and MunnuOh oh aah….
Bath time isover for Chunnu and Munnu, Yay!
It isdinner time for Chunnu and MunnuYum yum yum…
Dinner time isover for Chunnu and Munnu,Nana and Nani arewaiting to kiss Chunnu and MunnuMwaah, Mwaah,Mwaah…
Today's play time isover for Chunnu and Munnu,Sweet dreams nowfor Chunnu and MunnuZzzzz…
What will happen if...
...I press my belly button?
Phusssss!
Flat Sunita can slide under the door.
What will happen if I eat all these tomato seeds?Whooooosh!
Come and see Sunita, the Tomato Vine-Girl.
What will happen if I take a deep, deep breath?
Glwupppp!
I’m Balloon Sunita!
Bounce and roll, bounce and roll.
Bounce, bounce.
Roll, roll.
What will happen if I close my eyes tight, tighter, tightest?Mazzappa!
I’m Invisible Sunita!
No one knows I’m here.
What will happen if I pull my ears and stretch them out?Wheeeee!
I’m Flying Sunita, soaring with the birds.
But shhh!
Don’t tell anyone about Flat Sunita, Tomato Vine-Girl, Balloon Sunita, Invisible Sunita or Flying Sunita.
One day, all my powers will                      make me Super Sunita.
And I will save the world!
It was dawn.
In her nest, Kaage the crow woke up and looked around, bored.
She cleared her throat and cawed a few times.
Bo-ring.
Then, suddenly, she pricked up her ears.
A koel was singing his sweet song somewhere nearby.
For a while, Kaage enjoyed the song.
Then she got mad.
It just wasn't fair!
It was she who had warmed the egg that the koel had hatched from, and now that little bird was singing so much better than her!
But she should not be jealous, she told herself.
The thing to do was to take singing lessons from the koel.
Kaage went looking for the koel, and found her at last.
The koel looked at her a little suspiciously, but Kaage was very respectful.
“Will you teach me to sing?” Kaage asked humbly.
“All right,” said the koel.
“But on one condition.
You have to be here very early each morning, at daybreak.” Kaage nodded.
“Good.
Class begins tomorrow,” said the koel, flying off on her errands.
Kaage loved her sleep, and never woke up before sunrise.
But she had her first singing lesson the next morning at daybreak!
She wound up her alarm clock and set it before she went to bed.
When the alarm rang, Kaage jumped out of bed, rubbed the sleep out of her eyes, and rushed to class.
The koel was waiting impatiently.
As soon as Kaage landed on a nearby branch, the music lesson began.
“Now, let me hear you sing this,” said the koel.
“Kuhoo, kuhoo…” Eagerly, Kaage tried.
But all she could say was “Kaa, kaa.” After a while, the koel had had enough.
“You are impossible,” she declared.
“You will have to find yourself another teacher.” And off she flew.
Kaage was very disappointed.
Crying bitter tears, she returned to her nest.
Days passed.
One day, Kaage watched as the sky filled with dark clouds.
A cool breeze began to blow and it began to drizzle a little.
From her nest, Kaage could see the peacock spread his beautiful tail feathers and begin to dance.
She was filled with the urge to dance.
'Maybe the peacock can help,'  she thought to herself, and flew off to look for him.
“Peacock, will you give me dance lessons?” asked Kaage, when she had found him.
“Sure,” said the peacock.
“Just do as I do.” Kaage spread her tail feathers.
She stepped in time.
“That isn’t right,” said the peacock.
“Watch carefully when I do it.” Kaage tried again, and again, and again, but never got it right.
The peacock was furious.
“You will never learn to dance!” he scolded and flew away.
Kaage was sad.
She could not sing, and she could not dance.
Maybe she could learn to build a wonderful nest.
She went to the sparrow to ask for lessons.
But the sparrow wouldn’t hear of it.
“You?
You will never be able to build a nest like mine,” she said, nose in the air, and sent Kaage away.
Kaage felt very bad.
When would she find something that she was good at?
Looking down from her nest, she noticed that there was a pile of rice in the backyard of the house below.
She began to caw loudly, inviting her family and friends to the feast.
All of them ate until they were stuffed.
It was then that a thought struck Kaage.
All right, so she couldn't sing or dance or build a beautiful nest.
But which other bird, when it found food, invited others to share it?
Not the koel, not the peacock, and certainly not the sparrow.
No bird, in fact, except other crows like her.
Kaage was thrilled that she had discovered this for herself.
She was proud that she was part of such a generous family.
The other crows saw Kaage looking extremely happy with herself.“What is it, Kaage?
Are you getting married soon?” they teased.
Kaage blushed.
Use your imagination and colour this picture any way YOU like.
Reeti's vacation has started but she is absolutely unhappy.
She hates vacations.
She prefers going to school.
Her father gets her toys and books, tells her, her favorite tales.
He does Yoga every morning.
Reeti likes it and tries to do it herself.
Her mother is a poet who is busy on the computer.
Reeti loves to see her work.
She loves looking at her mother's growing belly.
The belly is round and big as it has a baby inside.
Her mother assures her," Very soon, you will have a brother or a sister to play with".Reeti is excited about this, but at this point, she has no one to play with.
She has no friends who live close enough for her to play with.
One evening, their neighbour, Das uncle rings their door bell.
He's seen standing with a black cage that has a bright green parrot in it.
He says,"We are leaving the city.
Do you want our Mithu?
He can speak!Reeti's parents look uncomfortable with the idea of keeping a bird in a cage but Reeti's excited,"Yes, uncle!
"That is how Mithu and Reeti becomes friends.
Reeti says, "Hello Mithu".Mithu looks at her and says, "Hello".Reeti finds it amusing and asks,"What is your name?
"Mithu says, "Hello".Reeti says," No!
Your name is Mithu.
Say Mithu.
"Mithu says, again,"Hello".
Reeti says," No!
We will try again!
My name is Reeti.
Mithu, listen carefully.
My name is Reeti.
What is your name?
"Mithu says,"Hello".Reeti laughs," No!
You are a very naughty boy,Mithu.
"Every day, Reeti tries teaching Mithu new words.
"Say ba-ba.
Say maa.
Say Ree-ti.
"However, Mithu keeps saying, 'hello'.
One day, mother takes Reeti to a birthday party far from the city.
It's her friend's birthday.
All her friends are there.
They have a lot of fun.
Reeti brings back a piece of cake for Mithu.
But where's Mithu?
Just then, father enters the house with Mithu in his cage.
Mithu says, "Hello".
Father says," I took your friend to the park for some fresh air".
Reeti's relieved.
She brings the piece of cake to Mithu but he does  not touch it.
Reeti's vacation's nearing its end.
One day, she spots a bunch of parrots flying to the tree outside her window, chirping loudly among themselves.
Reeti brings Mithu's cage near the window.
That seems to make him mad.
He starts chirping and flapping his wings.
He tries flying.
Reeti asks,"Are they your friends,Mithu?
"Mithu does not answer.
He stares at the parrots outside the window.
The bunch of parrots leave as hurriedly as they had come.
Reeti asks,"What were they talking about,Mithu?
"Mithu's sad voice forms the word 'hello'.
Riti's vacation is over.
The first day of school.
She meets all her teachers and friends.They play happily during the tiffin break.
The huge trees around their playground houses many birds, happily chirping away.
Reeti comes back home to find Mithu quietly sitting in his cage.
"Hello Mithu", she whispers.
Mithu looks at her silently.
Reeti keeps her school bag aside and opens the window.
She then, opens the door of the cage.
"Go Mithu!
Go find your friends", she says.Mithu looks at her.
Reeti says, "Go Mithu.
Fly away!"
Mithu takes one step after another away from the cage, looks back at Reeti for the last time and says,"Hello" and then, spreads his wings and flies to far and wide, closer to his friends.
Who can pet animals?Anyone who is trustworthy enough and is looking for a being to love, can pet animals.
If you feel lonely and sad, a pet can get you through it.
A pet is also capable of making you happy.
It will play with you and make you happy.
It will teach you important things about life and bring fun to it.
Tell me who doesn't want it?Will you or won't you pet an animal?Sure, it's fun to pet an animal, but don't hurry.
Just think about it for a while.
-Are your parents okay with the idea?-Do you really want a pet?
Remember, it will be with you till the end of its lifetime or yours.
It is not a toy that you can discard after you are done having fun with it.
-They require a steady supply of food, clean drinking water, exercise and love.
One must train them, bathe them and take them to vets.
This means, you will have an extra amount of daily work.
Do you have enough time for that?
When it will come in with muddy paws or chew things around, will you be able to forgive it?
Am I really ready to pet an animal?Do you want a pet because your best friend has one?
What are you thinking of getting?
- a dog?
a cat?
or, something else?
Are you even considering petting a mouse?
Stop here and ask yourself a few questions.
-Do I have enough time to look after pets?
Having a pet is a huge responsibility.
Be it training it or feeding it, or simply providing it with love.
You might have to spend a lot of time for your pet.
-Do I have enough space to accommodate a pet?Small animals like cat, fish or birds can fit themselves into a house of any shape or size.
However, animals like dogs require space to run around or to exercise.
What kind of pet do I want?If you want an animal of  a special species, you must speak to the specialist or the veterinarian.
Or, speak to the people who already have such a species and find out about their food habits, their general temperament and so on.
After that, carefully consider if you can pet such an animal.
How much can I spend?All pet animals require food and a place to stay.
For their health, they require daily checkups with the veterinarian.
Other than immunity and other injections, in case the pet's sick, it needs to be taken to the clinic.
Are you ready for these expenses?Will it be loved by everyone at your home?
Maybe you love animals but do your family feel the same about it?
It is essential to know the mindset of your family members before bringing a pet home.
a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing.
The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish.
They didn't saw any fish bigger than this!
Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!
"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM!
They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
ITS NOT A DESTINATION .....!
BUT THE JOURNEYThe story starts from the day of her childhood where she was very extrovert.
She had less friends but she tried her best to make new friends, she always tried to impress everyone so that the people like her, or support her but she was always unsuccessful because the people around her always found some mistake in her appearance but she was unstoppable .
The girl was really very kind and tty to help every one but people thought her to be very arrogant, they always made her feel that her presence was not so important at the place.
She knew that what people talk about her at her back, they use to troll her ,bully her and compare her to others but still she lived her life with a smile on her face
Her family was very supportive but financially disturbed.....they were not able to teach their children in rich school but still they sacrificed everything for their children.
She a elder brother who was very supportive and friendly....the girl used to share every thing to his brother and his brother also helped his sister in every phase of life but when needed he also scolded and slap her and fought against everyone the girl was good in studies as well as sports karate and also participated her self in everything and here comes the turn in her life class 5 she got a teacher who always made her feel that she is unique and precious the teacher trusted her much and the classmates got jealous.
but here now the girl stared getting self confidence and self believe.
now further the time passed and she got good marks in her finals of class 6 and the holidays after exams started but no one was aware that this 15 days holidays will be extended to 2 years.
this was the time of pandemic Covid-19, everyone was packed
inside their houses.
the lock down was anounced.
many family suffered from financial crisis.....same happened with the girls family they suffered alot due to this pandemic.
Now her father told her to change the school...and the girl also wanted to change the school and move on from from that school she thought that she will get new friend and new environment at the new school and she may come out of her anxious nature.
as she entered the school she got two friends who always tried to make her comfortable from the new environment but still the girl was not so habituated from the quade school but after lots of challenges she started finding comfort at the school.
as the time passes her past things started repeating that troll and bulley and again her anxiety started attacking her sghe was really distracted from everything not only studies but also the food but her bright and big smile hided everything with everyone.
i was fine untill the teacher were not complaining but now the teacher also started finding mistake in her
appereance.......at one place teacher were correct but the girl tried to change herself but still heard the same comments day by day the girls was deppressed from the situation even her parents was tensed that what had happened to the girl she was distracted from studies.
one day she decided to share everything to her parents anmd shared everything his parents said her to be as she is but the girl was convinced and choose the path of introvert and this decision her life .Her one and only mantra was speak less listen more react less observe more now she was the girl who acted as she wanted to act not how people want her to act.
She started knowing her self, no one now matter to her.
And whem people said I cannot see anything good in you she just said Dear you life is very difficult for blinds.....so just think I AM DEAD.
And this nature built her confidence and now she is comfortable but when she sit alone she see her self with lots of tears and a smiling face.
and yesssTHAT IS ME!!!
- AAKANSHA BHARDWAJ
One day, Sringeri Srinivas, the farmer, set out with his best cows to the cattle fair.
He had to walk along the new national highway that had come up near his village.
That big road had many cars and trucks.
Every driver seemed to be honking loudly.
Paoon!
Ponn!
Paaa!
The cows did not like the noise.
They decided to go back home.
He waved his hands at the drivers to stop the noise.
This did not help.
Seeing him, they just honked louder.
The noise of the horns went straight into his head.
And it stayed there.
It was a bad day for him.
He went back home with his cows.
MOOO!
The cows were happy to be in the cowshed again.
But the noise simply would not go away from his head.Paoon!
Ponn!
Paaa!
It kept on playing like a band of untrained musicians.
Other noises around him soon joined in the chorus.
Even the sounds that he heard daily suddenly became too loud for Sringeri Srinivas.
The ribbit ribbit of the frogs was noisy.The cicadas and their kirkk kirkk were tooloud.
Sringeri Srinivas wanted the hooting owls to be sent away.
He wasangry at the koyals for screeching loudly at 4 am.
And at the cows that mooed at 5 am.
Andwhoever asked the roosters to act as alarm clocks?
And that stupidtiger!
Enough of his roaring!
Poor Sringeri Srinivas.
His ears had become raw, like a fresh wound.
He tried hard to keep things quiet.He shouted at the children if they talkedloudly.
He glared at his wife Parvatamma when the pressure cookerwhistled and whistled.
Sringeri Srinivas only wanted silence.
Everyone tried to help.
Parvatamma stopped scolding the children.
The children played cricket quietly with a very soft ball.
The cows did not moo any more.
The cicadas and owls moved to another village.
Even the tiger stopped growling.
Yet Sringeri Srinivas was not happy.
He could hear the noise of everyone trying to be silent!
“I will go away from this place,” he declared one morning.
“Please don’t,” said Parvatamma.
“Where will you find silence?” Sringeri Srinivas simply frowned at her and started to walk away from his village.
Soon, he came close to a new town.
He watched the noisy people in the noisy town.
A young man passed by.
He had some wires dangling from his ears.
Sringeri Srinivas could also hear a ‘ting dang ting dang’ sound.
The man looked very happy.
He did not even notice that trucks were blaring horns nearby.
“What is this?” he asked the man.“Theseare my headphones.
Here, try them on,” the young man said.
He put themon for Sringeri Srinivas.
Music!
Ting dang ting dang.
No horns.
“Aha!
This is just what I need,” he said.
Sringeri Srinivas went into the town.
He bought a pair of the best headphones and put them on.
At last... no more noise!
He returned to his village, with his big new headphones.
His wife was happy to see him.
Sringeri Srinivas gave her a big smile.
His children helped him to connect the new headphones to some good, happy music.
Now, when Sringeri Srinivas gets very angry at the cars or even at the frogs, he puts on his headphones and listens to the silence.
Or he listens to good music.
In the village, the cows are mooing again.
The koyals have come back.
Ribbit ribbit, go the frogs.
Kirkk kirkk, sing the cicadas.
But the cars on the highway are still making too much noise.Paoon!
Ponn!
Paaa!
It is not a good sound.
Sringeri Srinivas has to take his cows to the fair soon.
Will they want headphones too?
Once upon a time, there were two kingdoms.
One kingdom in the South, and one in the North.
One day, the king of the Northern kingdom sent a message to the Southern kingdom.
The Northern king was declaring war on the South!
The ravens discussed this and decided to change the message.
The message was: Let peace prevail among us.
The king smiled and sent the same message back to the Northern king.
To this day, the kingdoms are at peace.
And no one knows that ravens can read.
Road : why you don't care of me?Child :I care, but some people don't.
Road : So why you don't tell to the world?
Child : Family stops me and I am a child too.
Road : Do you have any idea?
Child : Yes !
We can publish in news papers and by broadcast in tv news.
After few days the road began to clean.
Road : (with happy) Thank you .
Child : How you thank me?
It's my duty ,to clean my country's roads.
Hamisi needs a new school uniform.
His dad takes him to the market.
Hamisi sees a boywearing a beautifulshirt.
"That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.
"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like that boy," says Hamisi.
"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi.
"Dad, please buy one for me."
"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.
"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.
Hamisi's dad buys the uniform.
He is surprised when he gets the change.
He has enough money left over to buy a shirt!
It is Hamisi's lucky day!
Which shirt will he choose?
"Lineup class!
Let’s go to the park," Laila Miss says.
Allthe students hold hands, chattering away.
Kavya stands by herself.
Asthey start walking, Laila Miss asks, "Does anyone know what acaterpillar becomes when it grows up?"
Kavya’sstomach flips.
She knows the answer!
Should she say something?
Kavyaand her family have just moved to Bengaluru from her village.
Theylive at the construction site where her parents work.
It’shard living in a half-finished house.
The air smells of smoke, andthe honking traffic makes it hard to sleep.
The towering buildings,zooming cars, and busy people make her feel very, very small.
Kavyahas been coming to school for a week.
She still hasn’t spoken toanyone.
Whatif they make fun of her accent?
Or tease her because she’s neverbeen to school before?
Kavyatakes a deep breath and raises her hand.
In a noisy city likeBengaluru, she can’t be quiet forever.
"Whencaterpillars grow up, they become butterflies," Kavya says.
"That’sright!"
Laila Miss says.
"Caterpillarsare only caterpillars for a few weeks," Kavya says.
"They spendthat whole time eating leaves."
"Theymust get very big," says Mary, her classmate.
"Theydo!
""After they eat and eat and eat, caterpillars weave cocoons on the sides of plants.
They go inside, where they grow and change," says Kavya.
"That’scorrect," Laila Miss says.
"They stay in the cocoons for abouttwo weeks.
When they come out, they are butterflies."
"Look,we’re at the park!"
Mary says.
Kavya gasps.
The park is covered in butterflies!
Bluebutterflies the colour of rivers.
Yellow butterflies the colour ofsunlight.
Orangebutterflies the colour of ripe chikoos.
Black-and-white butterfliesthe colours of starry skies.These are all the colours Kavya misses from her village.She feels her heart flutter.
"Every year, butterflies travel thousands of kilometres to come to this park.
They are here formore food, better weather, and a safe placeto lay eggs," Laila Miss says.
"This journey is calledmigration."
"Don’tthey get tired, flapping their wings for so long?"
a classmateasks.
"Ifthere is a strong wind, they don’t have to flap their wings,"Kavya says.
"They spread their wings and glide."
"Thatmust be bumpy," Mary whispers to Kavya.
Kavyathinks about the bus ride to Bengaluru – squeezed in between allthe luggage.
Bumping and tumbling for hours and hours and hours.
Isthat how a butterfly feels on the wind?
"Whenbutterflies migrate, they follow rivers.
To stay healthy, they stopalong the riverbank to soak up minerals with their feet.
It’scalled mud-puddling," Laila Miss says.
"Mud-puddling?"
Mary says.
"That sounds like fun."
Maryand Kavya smile at each other.
"Itis," Kavya says.
"But now puddles are hard to find.
"InKavya’s village, men in trucks take sand away from the river.
Theweather gets hotter and hotter.
There is less and less rain.
Last year, the river went dry.
The butterfliesdidn’t have enough water to mud-puddle.
Kavya’s family didn’thave enough water to farm.
That’swhy they moved to Bengaluru.
"Youknow a lot about butterflies, Kavya," says Laila Miss.
"That’sbecause they are my favourite insects," says Kavya.
"Whydo you love butterflies so much, Kavya?"
asks Mary.
Howcan Kavya choose just one thing?
Sheloves how their bodies are sometimes spotted and sometimes striped.
How they drink nectar with their long noses.
How they spread pollen,which makes more flowers grow.
"Theyfly far, but wherever they land, they make new friends," Kavyasays, squeezing Mary’s hand.
"They’re very small, but they’realso very brave."
"Justlike you," Laila Miss says.
Kavyasmiles a smile as wide as a butterfly’s wings.
Makea Butterfly Rest StationButterfliesin India migrate twice a year.
Their journey is getting harder andharder because our forests and rivers are disappearing.
Butterfliesdon’t have enough places to rest.
Many get tired along the way.
Oneway to help butterflies is to make safe spaces for them to stop andhave a good meal.
Here’show to make a butterfly rest station:Find	a flat vessel with high edges, like a thali or	a	plate.Butterflies	love bright colours.
Paint the vessel red, yellow, or orange.Fill	the vessel with butterfly food.
It’s easy to make!
Mix four cups	of water with one cup of sugar.
Add pieces of over-ripe fruit.
Butterflies love bananas, guavas, mangoes, papayas, and oranges.Keep the vessel out on your veranda, windowsill, or anywhere outside.Clean and refill the vessel every two to three days.To attract even more butterflies, plant flowers that butterflies love.
You can plant verbena, geraniums, dahlias, or sunflowers.
You don’t need a lot of space – you can plant them in pots on the ground, or keep them on windowsills.
Heeeee!
There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn, and no tail.
It is fat, with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze, this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter.
Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow, what would you do?
﻿There are four of us in the family.
Miguel is my favorite,                              and I follow him everywhere.
I have to keep an eye on Miguel.
I'm older than him.
Sometimes Miguel is not careful,                         so I had to guard the house.
﻿I am with him in everything.
We sympathize with everyone.
We play with each other.
And Mother scolded us too.
I help Mom when Miguel is busy.
I pimp the birds away from our wares.
Today, Miguel will teach me.
Finally, I will learn something new.
I am a kind dog.
I'm not chasing cats.
If you're Miguel's friend, I'm your friend too!
Read the following sentences.
Which of these do you like?
I love to dance.
I love to swim.
I love jumping rope.
I love to draw.
I love cycling.
I love to climb.
There is a saying “Nothing is more loyal than a dog”.
This is because the dog does not leave his master.
Whether he goes away or gets lost, he can definitely return to his master.
Hello...my name is TukTuk ...I have a BIG Family....let's go and meet them
This is my mother and this is my father !
Meet Nitu ..my big brother and Mitu ..my big sister
And here are my both maternal and paternal grandparents !
My mother has three sisters ..and I call them "Mavshi "*(*Maternal aunts in Marathi are called "Mavshi " )
My father has three brothers...two elder brothers and two younger brothers ..I call all of them "Kaka "*(Kaka =paternal uncle in Marathi )
and meet my aunts ....two elder and two younger ..I call them "Kaku"*( *Kaku =paternal aunt is called Kaku in Marathi )
And my family also has five small kids !!!
!
And we play together and have fun together !
see..I have a big and lovely family !!
!
oops !!
How can I forget this important family member !!
Meet my pet :Bujo !He loves to roam around me and does "woof ..woof " all the times !!
!
Why is the sky blue?
It's not always blue.
Is not it?
Why are the leaves green?
They are not always green.
Is not it?
Why are bananas yellow?
Ripe bananas are yellow.
Unripe bananas are green.
Why are umbrellas black?
Not all umbrellas are black.
Why is the blood red?
There is iron in the blood.
It makes it red.
Why is salt white?
I do not know!
I like playing with my friend Chuma.
We are good friends.
When either one of us is sent somewhere, we go together.
One day, my grandmother sent me to the shop to buy salt and cooking oil.
I went with Chuma.
On the way, we saw our friends playing football.
"Ah!
Football!"
I said.
I wanted to play too.
I said to Chuma, "Let's ask if we can play with them.
I like playing football very much."
Chuma replied, "Let us go to the shop first, then we can come to play."
But I replied, "Let us play first!
Grandmother will not allow us to return."
We joined our friends to play.
I was the goal keeper.
The goal posts were made of two big stones.
I worked hard to catch the ball.
My friends were not able to score any goals.
We played until the field was full of sand.
Then we went to the shop.
Grandmother's money was gone!
I started to cry.
Chuma shouted, "Stop crying.
You wanted to play first."
We returned home without salt or cooking oil.
We were very dirty and worried.
Grandmother was annoyed when we got home.
The first question she asked us was, "Where were you all this time?"
We had to tell her the truth.
She warned, "You should never go to play without permission."
We went to feed the ducks.
Later on, we cleaned ourselves.
I love walking.
I love walking especially with my aunt.
I love it when my aunt holds my hands.
I love it when my aunt lets go of my hand as well.
We don't walk fast.
We stop and we say hello to a dog,
to a cat, to a mouse, to a crow and to a tree.
My aunt loves collecting flowers from the street.
I love collecting stones from the street.
I love collecting all kinds of stones: big ones, small ones, round ones and  flat ones .
But, the best kind of stones are the smallest ones.
The stones that can almost disappear when I put them in my pocket.
My pockets get filled with stones after I finish my walk with my aunt.
My grandmother gave me a pod of peas from her basket ,today.
Dilip anna gave me a clip from his magical shop.
Nirmal akka gave me this sticker because I waited patiently.
Anjum aunty gave me a button from her jar of buttons.
After coming home, I took everything out of my pocket and put it in my yellow jar.
In case I find a small stone in my pocket, I will give it to my aunt .
Sanjay, Sita and Ruffles the dog are seed collectors who love to have fun!
They search the ground for seeds and bulbs they can plant.
After school, they walk by the rivers, valleys and hills, searching for new seeds.
"Here, Ruffles!"
says Sanjay.
"Sniff over here!
See what you can find!
""This is a new seed!"
says Sita.
They walk in the wind, rain and sunshine, searching for fruit, finding trees and looking after them...
...new trees they can take shelter under from the strong winds and the hot sun...
...new trees like me!
I'm a magical tamarind tree.
"What is it, Ruffles?"
says Sita.
"What can you see, boy?"
says Sanjay.
Sita finds some fruit.Ruffles finds his butterfly.Sanjay eats some of the fruit from my branches."Delicious!"
he says.
"The fruit from this tree is so tasty!"
says Sita.
"The best tasting fruit we've found!"
says Sanjay."Ruff!"
agrees Ruffles.I grew the apples and bananas especially for them to pick!
Sanjay, Sita and Ruffles love me, the magical tamarind tree, and hug me regularly.
Their care helps me to produce more tasty fruit!
"We can take the seed from this tree," says Sita.
"And we can grow a new one!
""Great idea!"
says Sanjay.
"Then we'll have loads of different fruits!""Ruff!"
says Ruffles.
They visit me often and eat their lunch underneath my branches.
Every time they come I grow something new for them!
And over time, their seed collections grow into new plants and trees.
Trees just like me - a magical tamarind tree!
Once upon a time at a chicken coop, Henry came out a chicken egg.
Everything was going fine, but after 5 days a stone fell into Henry's beak.
Henry's beak broke and he wasn't able to eat.
The owner of the chicken coop decided to kill Henry when he realized that it couldn't eat.
When he was about to kill Henry.
A girl named Anna said, "Wait Uncle, don't kill him.
I will take the chick to my home."
The owner said, "But what are you gonna do with it, It will just die after 4-5 days.
Its beak is broken so it can't eat."
Anna said, "My father is a animal rescuer.
He will sure find a way to rescue him."
The man said, "Ok, If your dad can take care of it, and somehow feed it.
You can take Henry.
""Ok me and my dad will take good care of him."
The owner gave her Henry and the girl went to home."
Her father asked about the chick.
Anna explained about the situation and said, "Can Henry survive."
Her father said," Yeah it can survive but feeding him would be very difficult."
Anna's father found it difficult to feed Henry first, but after a week he can easily feed him.After 2 days, he thought of an idea.
He has some tools that might fix henry's beak.
But Henry was too small and fragile to be used by those tools.
He told Anna to remind him to fix Henry's beak after a year.
Anna wrote it on a paper so she can't forget it.
After a year Anna reminded her father to fix henry's beak.
After 2 nervous hours Henry's beak was Fixed and Henry lived a Happy Life.
﻿The end
Hello, my name is Rake.
This is my house.
Dad and Çinu also live here.Merhaba, benim adım Tırmık.
Bu benim evim.
Babam ve Çina da burada yaşıyor.
I have the best chair in the house, but isn't it better to sit on the lap?Evin en güzel koltuğu benimkidir.
Ama yine de kucakta yatmak daha güzel değil mi?
Çinu is my best friend.
I always wait for her to come back from school.Çinu benim en iyi arkadaşım.
Ben hep onun okuldan dönüşünü beklerim.
I keep myself clean without water.
I don't need a bath like Tombik.Ben su olmadan da kendimi temizleyebiliyorum.
Tombik gibi yıkanmak zorunda değilim.
Shhhhh ... Don't tell anyone that I'm hiding here.
1,2,3, ... Gotcha!Şşşşşşt... Kimse burada saklandığımı söylemesin.
1,2,3,... Yakaladım!
Mom shouts at me when I bring home some funny food from the garden.Annem, eve yenmemesi gereken bir yiyecek getirdiğimde bana kızar.
I can climb trees and jump.
I know all the shortcuts.Ben ağaçlara da tırmanabiliyorum.
O yüzden bütün kestirme yolları biliyorum.
Sangu lives nearby.
He teases me and that makes me angry!Sangu yakınlarımızda oturuyor.
Benimle uğraşır durur.
Kızıyorum artık!
Sanju doesn't know that tigers belong to the cat family... we both have sharp claws.Sangu'dan bahsetmişken, kaplanlar da kedi ailesindendir.
Ama onların patileri daha keskin.
My friends sometimes make lots of noises outside, but I sleep quietly in bed.Benim arkadaşım bazen geceleri horluyor.
Ama ben yatağımda sessiz sessiz uyurum hep.
Paw speaks.When the dogs are happy, they wag their tails.When cats shake their tails, they are getting angry.Pençe de konuşuyor.
Köpekler mutlu olduklarında kuyruklarını sallıyorlar.Kediler de kızdıkları zaman kuyruklarını sallarlar.
I am a tree and I am your friend.
I am a tree I give you life.
I am a tree I give you shelter.
I am a tree I give you shade.
I am a tree I give you food.
I am a tree I give you furniture.
I am a tree I give you education.
I am a tree I give you fire.
I am a tree and I am your friend.
Banti was going to his mama's village by a car.
Banti liked so much there.
Suddenly he saw a running train.
Like running dinosaur !
Oh no !!
﻿﻿﻿
﻿Car started going fast.
In the way for crossing the river, he saw a big pool.
While crossing pool he feels,That the big pool was a dinosaur !
Banti was amazed.
He decided the pool's name -'dinopool' !
Banti was having so much fun in this trip.
While looking outside, he felt sleepy and soon he slept.
In his sleep here saw dinosaur eating mangos.
This is amazing !
Banti was going to his mama's village.
There he was also going to eat mangos.
In his dreams he saw dinosaurs flying.
Fire was coming from the flying dinosaur's mouth.
Banti was laughing in his dreams.
Suddenly when light flashed on his face, he opened his eyes.
But what did he saw?
One tall dinosaur was throwing fire the boats in ocean.
It is amazing !
Actually it was the light house !
Everywhere dinosaurs and dinosaurs  !
!
Why have you not done your homework?Miss, it is all because of the cat.
The cat sat on the tree.So I took a ladder to climb the tree.
But the ladder was broken.
So I took a hammer.The hammer made a noise.So the baby woke up.
Mother ran out to see the baby.So the monkey came in.
The monkey ate all the food.So there was no food for us.
Father bought chicken biryani for us.So the dog followed him.
The dog ate my notebook.So I couldn't bring my homework.
So, the dog ate your homework?
Yes, Miss.
But it is all because of the cat.
Long time ago, there was a grandmother and her granddaughter.
One day, while grandmother was going to the mountain to sell rice cakes, a tiger appeared...and said...
I won't eat you if you give me a rice cake.Grandmother quickly handed a rice cake from her basket and ran away.
The tiger ate and ate the rice cake and eventually got a stomachache.So, the tiger went to the hospital and got a shot.
The grandmother who safely returned home lived happily ever after with her granddaughter.
Long time ago, Rabbit, Tortoise and Hare ran in a competition.
Other animals watched the race.
Rabbit was defeated.
Although Tortoise won the race, he did not boast.
Tortoise and Rabbit remained friends.
King Lion sent Tortoise and Rabbit to visit the neighbouring kingdom.
Tortoise and Rabbit left to do as King Lion ordered.
King Lion waited for Tortoise and Rabbit to return.
The road they used was full of stones and thorns.
Tortoise and Rabbit walked and walked.
They rested and talked.
They planned to help each other to.
Rabbit carried Tortoise over thorns.
When they reached the river, Tortoise carried Rabbit across.
Tortoise walked very fast.
Rabbit held on his back.
Tortoise and Rabbit discussed with the other king as their king wanted.
They returned home very fast.
Tortoise and Rabbit were bigger friends!
We want to go to the playground.
How do we get there?
We could ride a bicycle.
We could ride a motorbike.
We could ride a tricycle taxi.
We could ride in a horse-drawn cart.
We could ride in an ox-cart.
We could drive a race car.
We can drive a big car.
We could row a boat.
We could ride an elephant.
No!
We should walk.
The brave boy!Once there was a boy named Ramesh.
He was very brave and wise.
He worked in other town to make money and help his parents.
One day he wanted to see his mother.
So he took permission from his master and started his journey on foot.
There was a big forest to cross to reach his village.
He reached the forest within 30 minutes.
He took rest for a while and again started his journey through the forest.
In the mid of the jungle he saw a thief riding on a horse.
He thought of a plan to get rid of him.
He bravely went to the thief and asked him to accompany him to his home.
The thief agreed so that he could loot all the family.
When they reached home, he immediately went to his mother and told that the man who accompanied him was a thief!
But he said not to worry and explained the plan.
Then his mother gave the thief honey mixed with sleeping medicine.
He drank it and immediately fell asleep.
They took him to a dried well and dumped him there.
Ramesh called all the villagers.
And they found that he was the thief they were searching for more than five years.
All praised the brave boy.
Arush is learning about community helpers in his school.
He had a lot of questions in mind.
His mother thought to explain to him by showing our community helpers.
They came to the market.Arush asked, "Who is she ?
"Mom said, " She is a Vegetable seller".
Arush asked, Mom, Which shop is this?Mother replied , This is a grocery store.
We purchase our daily need items from here.
Arush said, OK, mother.
Arush asked , what they are doing?Mother replied , This is a garment store.
We purchase clothes from here.Arush said, Thank you so much, mother.
Now, I understood about our community helpers and the work they do
The Captain of ArgoUpon the blue seas of Oceanus, a ship sailed among the waves.
Its radiance was that of the sun.
Its brilliant vessel shined pleasantly and it moved smoothly against the divine waters.
It itself was divine in nature, having both the blessing of Pallas Athena and the Great Mother Hera.More precious than the divine ship itself was the crew that it supported upon its deck.
For a single cause, heroes from all over Greece gathered to take part in a journey.
A journey that could lose their lives or earn them eternal glory.
These were famed heroes.
No name was little and so they gathered the collective pride of those who stood at the top their entire lives.
Yes, the golden crew of all ages met on the deck of their ship to choose the most important position.
A leader.
The position would earn all of them the greatest fame of being the one who led the most powerful men and women of Greece.
These people who always stood at the top of their lives created a problem, they always wanted to be at the top.
A boy shouted that it should be him.
This boy was Theseus, slayer of the mighty Minotaur, the half-bull half-man monster of King Minos.
He boasted strength and wittiness.
Many thought he fitted the best.
After all, a great leader must need great strength as well.
A girl argued that it should be her.
Among the men she was the fastest, she said.
Tell her of an animal and she would announce that she hunted it.
This was Atalanta, the swift-footed hunter of Artemis.
Though female, none could dispute her prowesses.
Two twins spoke up at the same time.
They were the Dioscuri, divine twins of mortal and god.
Atop any vessel, they would never get lost as, under the domain of Zeus the Sky God, they would always see the safest path for their journey.
Many supported the twins as one could never guess the temper of the God Poseidon.
Others spoke up as well.
Telamon the great warrior yelled his claim of royal blood but was over shouted by Caenis the invincible.
The Boriads, winged brothers who could promise the people wind for the journey.
Shouts over shouts and some not so well-meaning.
Atalanta nocked her bow after someone shouted over her abandonment, Theseus readied his blade when a man mentioned his unknown father’s divine blood that breathed strength into him, and the Dioscuri became viscous after being called the sons of a swan.
It was Orpheus, the most talented musician of all that calmed them with a single stroke of his lyre.
The tune stopped the crowd from a fight as the man announced with a voice that could bring even gods to tears.
“Why fight, my friends, when we can be diplomatic?
No need for blood to be spilled on this ship which shall take us along the greatest journey known to all.
Why not this, all will get to vote on a certain person.
The one with the highest vote will be our leader as we shall pick him.”His reasoning was solid and, with the help of his divine voice, all were pleased with the idea.
As they were beginning to share their ideas on how to vote.
A proposition was made.
Theseus, the hero of Athens, proposed the idea that one vote for all was too much on their pride.
They’d be disgraced to be called equal with other men below them.
Orpheus, unable to calm the masses no longer, complied.
And so, it was said that Theseus had the most powerful vote next to a certain hero.
He stood at the corner of the deck when all of this commotion happened.
He, the greatest man with the greatest claim of glory simply said nothing except watch.
This was Heracles, the mightiest of the Greeks and the strongest man alive.
He looked over to his friend, the man who invited him to the crew, writing down on a piece of paper that would be cast into magical flames that’d record what was said.
When everyone threw these papers into the fire, the one whose name was written the most would appear among the smoke.
“Jason,” the mighty Heracles said.
“Whose name shall you write?”“Mine, of course.” The young man replied bluntly.
Prince of Iolcus and its rightful ruler.
Heracles scoffed at the man’s pride.
“But you hold no claim.
No glory.
No fame.
None even remember your name.
Your vote will be considered less than 1 as you are the only one who has yet to even perform a feat.” The man chided him.
“So what?
It does not matter if I cannot be the leader, I shall try with all my might.
I will not lie down easily.”Heracles looked at him appraisingly.
“But why do you want to be the leader so much?
Is it because of the fame?
The glory?
Or the title?”Jason looked off into the distance for a minute, contemplating and answering as he threw his fire with the rest of the crew.
“No.
None of those.
I want the Argos for my name.
Not the glory that comes along with it or the title.
I want to go back to my kingdom to prove that I, an unknown mortal man, can too lead the most harrowing adventures.”Heracles was stunned for a moment, then he laughed, a laugh so great that it shook the other crewmates awake from their reveries of glory.
He quickly wrote down a name and threw it into the fire.
Jason simply sat and watched, then smiled when the smoke of the paper vanished into thin air.
All the crewmates gathered after the last paper was thrown.
They stood around expectantly, already imagining their name above the fire.
Orpheus finally stood up and walked over to the fire, he took up a jar of water and poured it.
The sizzling of the flame echoed through the deck as smoke bellowed upwards to the heavens.
The smoke danced and waved until it formed a singular name.
Jason.
The crew was stunned.
Who?
They all thought collectively.
Orpheus smiled as he announced the leader of the Argonauts.
The unknown hero, son of Aeson, the man whose name meant nothing at all.
Jason turned towards his friend, the mightiest man.
“Why?” he asked.
“Because you are the only one brave enough to write your own name.
Though everyone else wanted the position, they merely wanted it to be at the top.
When Orpheus announced the voting system, they all thought to write another’s name in fear of me.
My vote carried the most sway, as you can see, so they decided to vote for someone else.
To curry their favor if they became the leader.” He laughed.
“Great heroes so brave yet fear the thought of losing in anything.
They all threw away their chance when they decided to rather find an alternative than face me.
Except you.”Jason said nothing.
He simply clasped his friend on his shoulder and walked up to the hearth where the smoke still bellowed.
Above him stood his name, a name no one knew.
A name that now held the title of leader.
Orpheus smiled at their new leader, a mortal man with nothing to him except that daring smile.
“This is our captain, great heroes of the ages.
This is Jason.
Leader of the Argonauts.”
One elephant isgoing to drink water.
Two giraffes are going to drink water.
Three buffaloesand four birds are also going to drink water.
Five antelopes and warthogs are walking to the water.
Seven zebras are running to the water.
Eight frogs and nine fish are swimming in the water.
One lion roars.
He also wants to drink.
Who is afraid of the lion?
One elephant is drinking water with the lion.
Itwas a new day.
The sun shone softly on the forest.
The birdswoke up.
Amillipede lay curled under a big brown leaf.
The twittering birdswoke her up.
“Goaway!
Let me sleep!” she grumbled.
“I know it is morning.
You don’t have to make a fuss about it every day,” she told thebirds.
Themillipede crawled out from under the leaf.
She stretched her firstfifteen pairs of legs.
Then she let out a giant yawn.
“Iam starving!” said the millipede and set out to look for food.
Inher hurry, she stumbled over a rock.
“Oh my gosh!
Oh my gosh!
I have broken a leg!” she shouted.
Alittle sparrow was busy picking grains nearby.
“Ha!
You have broken a leg?
I would break one too, if I had so many!
Lookat me!
I have two legs.
One follows the other.
No problem!
Easy!” she said smugly.
“And what is all this hurry for?”
“Couldyou please help me?” asked the millipede.
“Thisearly in the day?
No ma’am, sorry!
I have work to do,” said thesparrow and flew away.
Themillipede asked the honeybees for help.
But they were busy collectinghoney from the flowers.
Thedragonflies did not even look at her, and buzzed on.
“Youhave so many legs!” said the butterfly.
“Why would you care ifone breaks?
Stop it with all the drama!”Thesnail had advice.
“You are so careless!
You should learn to walklike this.
S-L-O-W-L-Y.”
Bynow the millipede was feeling very sad.
“Sniff!
Sniff!
No one wants to help me!
I do want to walk well again,” shesobbed.
Aspider was merrily swinging on his web.
He saw the millipede crying.
“Hey there little friend!
What makes you cry so early in the day?”he asked.
“Ibroke a leg and it hurts.
Could you please help me?” askedthe millipede.
“Ohyes, I can help you.
But how do I find the broken leg from all theselegs?
I can only count up to eight,” said the spider.
“Okay,count with me,” said the millipede.
“One...seven...twenty-three...fifty-eight...ninety-two...onehundred and fifteen...one hundred and OUCH!
There it is!
My onehundred and thirty-seventh leg!”
Thespider swung down to the millipede.
He went round and round the leg, wrapping it with the silk threads from his web.
“Do you feel betternow?” he asked.
The millipede smiled happily.
“Thankyou, dear spider.
I don’t know what I would have done without you.”Takecare now, little millipede.
Don’t trip over something again.
Byebye!” said the spider.
“Bye!”said the happy millipede.
Sukhiya Kaka lived in a village called Bitauna.
Bitauna was famous all over Rajasthan for its singers.
No celebration was complete without Sukhiya Kaka's sweet songs.
Today he had been invited to village Jhalaura.
Sukhiya Kaka twirled his big moustache and set off.He was singing raag Malhar....Come to me o rolling clouds...
Suddenly, he heard, dhupp dhupp dhupp dhupp!Was someone giving a beat to his song?Dinoo, the dinosuar came running towards him.
Sukhiya Kaka was so happy to see him!
You don't get such a BIG listener every day!...
Come to me o rolling clouds, shower me with lovely rain!Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo sang a duet and did a little jig to keep time.
The clouds just had to listen to them!Lightning flashed and the wind danced.
Dark clouds came rolling in.
Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo laughed with joy.
As the rain came pouring down, Sukhiya Kaka and Dinoo shared a small umbrella.
Then off they went to Jhalaura following the smell of yummy pakoras, singing...O thank you for the lovely rain...O..la la la.
Dear Reader,Have you ever seen a dinosaur?Do you think they would have sung songs?What do you like to do in the rain?What do you like to eat when it rains?
#6FrameStoryChallenge: A Carnival of ArtThe illustrations in this book were created as part of the #6FrameStoryChallenge, an online campaign run by Pratham Books to build a rich bank of illustrations for StoryWeaver.
The essence of the #6FrameStoryChallenge was to tell a good story using just 6 illustrations.
The campaign inspired nearly 70 illustrators to donate their time and skills to India’s first open-source story-publishing platform for children.
What started out as an experimental campaign soon blossomed into a carnival of art, birthing nearly 500 new illustrations.These wordless narratives cut across language barriers, opening up a world of possibilities, encouraging StoryWeaver’s growing community to dream up multiple stories around these images.
The #6FrameStoryChallenge is a powerful reminder of the need for collaboration, to get closer to our mission: “A Book in Every Child’s Hand.”
Why is the baby crying?
I think she is hungry.
Why is the boy sad?
I think he is missing his father.
Why is the girl happy?
She has a new dress.
Why is the old man laughing?
He read a good joke.
Why is the lady smiling?
Her children are reading quietly.
What is this lady feeling?
I think she is feeling shy.
Ben and Thabo are two hungry boys.
Granny is making ten cupcakes.
She puts them on a plate.
Ben takes one cupcake.
Thabo takes two cupcakes.
Ben takes four cupcakes.
Thabo takes two cupcakes.
How many cupcakes did Ben eat?
How many cupcakes did Thabo eat?
How many cupcakes are left for granny?
Call one more personOne old lady put a seed in the soilShe wanted to grow carrotA seedling came outSlowly it grew into a plant.
She added a little mannureCarrot grew more and moreShe thought to pluck itAnd prepare hot halwa.She hold it on the topBut nothing came outReally nothing came outCall one person more.
Only then her grandson cameHe also pulled it alongNothing has come, nothing came outCall one person more.
Only then her dog came thereAll pulled it with full forceNothing has come, nothing came outCall one person more.
Then came old lady catOverhearing hue and cryAll pulled it with forceThe carrot came out at last.Lo!
It is strangeWe did it.
ChandooChandoo has  a little brainAlways busy in reading Always showed high brainLike a learned man.One day busy in readinghad high dreamsTo do something bigTo earn great name.
If any house is on fireI will reach running at onceI will jump inside the fireI will fight for others till end.I will sacrifice for othersI will earn good nameThe one who takes other's painIs real hero  and saint.
Munni came while running"Come soon", Chandoo bhaiBrother has burnt his handMaking a great hue and cry.Mother has gone out for workI have a lot to do.How can I do all the tasksPlease bring some medicine.Chandoo got startledAnd angry over MunniWhy came here runningWhy not applied alum or haldi?
Do not bother me for silly thingsDo not you ever come.There is always a nuisance of homeShould I leave my books aside?Getting upset with Chandoo angerMunni ran back to brother.She pampered her brotherAnd spent the whole day.Mother came in the eveningShe listened Chandoo's doing.She went to Chandoo's roomFretful on his inhuman deed.
Your younger brother was in painWhy can't you bring balm?You say yourself a scholarBut you are a stone and proud.You are useless for homeWhat for your studies to me?Uff!
What the hell!You may be lion in street, but a fox at home.
Old man crushed under MotorcarO grandmother!
My grandmother!
"What happened?
", she said.It is bad, very bad.
"Oh God!
What is there?
"That  our beloved old manCrushed today under motorcar How badly injured he is!He is in pain, a lot of pain.
He is lying and crying thereBathed himself in tearsNo body is there to his rescueThe motorcar driver too fled away.Grandmother was terrifiedprayed God for his lifeLet us see the old manwho is crushed under car.Both came out on the roadStepped fast toward the spotGrandmother turned aroundThe old man was nowhere.
Old man was lying flat on groundThe toy motor was on his belly"Oh,my God!
",said grandmotherAnd Old grandmother too laughed.
I am a little girlI am a little girlI am not afraid of anyoneI do what I love to doI do not agree with anyone.I have my innocent faceMy eyes are dark and blackI keep hopping here and thereLike a playful butterfly.
Beetles make sound at night"Fairies come," mother saysThey lullaby at nightTo sleep all good child.I say innocentlyPlease call them inside.Mother clap me lovinglyAsks me to sleep.
I came out of homeDuring my dreamsI wanted to know the secretOf fairies who sleep us.There were stars far in skyThey were smiling at meThey were twinkling Lovingly they were calling me.
All of sudden, a pair of feathersWere attached to my shouldersThey were helping me to fly highThey took me a far.I was flying high in milky wayI saw  a group of fairiesThe queen fairy came to escort meI , at once, went with her.All the fairies were togetherThey all hugged me tightIt was morning!
Wake up my child!My mother has come to me.
First, I will build a bridge.
After that, I will build a very tall tower.
And then, I will build the longest roadin the world.
It will start at my roomand go right up to the moon!
When I build these structures,I will be a civil engineer.
I will build engines too.
Some engines will be in rocketsand some will bein planes.
The plane will take us from country to country and the rocket will fly us all the way to Mars.
My Anaideo* will come with me on all my trips!
When I build flying engines,I will be an aerospace engineer.
*Anaideo means grandmotherin Assamese.
But I won’t stop at that.
I will produce electricity from small particles.
One tiny particle will light up our whole village.
Anaideo will be so happy that she will throw a big feast!
When I make power like that, I will be a nuclear engineer.
I will build a machine to clean the sea.
And another to clean the air.
The animals will be healthyand people will breathe easy.
I will save the earthwith my machines!
When I make machinesto clean the planet,I will be an environmental engineer.
I will build a new ear for Pempem(she lost it in a fight... grrrr).
Then I will build a new set of teeth for Anaideo.
Finally, I will build wings for me!
When I build artificial body parts,I will be a biomedical engineer.
And I will soar over theworldlooking for more things to build.
Nityawalked down the stone passageway to the roomy bathroom at the far end of thebungalow.
The old family home was surrounded by lush greenery and spread out inthe way only old city bungalows did.
The bathroom, as was customary, waslocated at the far end of the house, away from the residential rooms.
She unlatched the door and pushed it open, only to freeze.
There,on the cold tile floor, lay coiled a metre-long snake.
Brown gleaming scalescaught the faint light streaming in from the open window.
Nitya gasped.
Herheart began to thump in her chest as the snake slithered away from the door.
The girl saw two beady black eyes as the snake darted out its forked tongueonce, twice.
It was huge; long with a sinuous body that took up a large portionof the bathroom.
Nityacouldn’t help herself.
She slammed the bathroom door shut and took off down thecorridor, shouting for her father.
Heappeared, looking worried.
“Nitya?
What’s the matter?
Why are you shouting?”“There’sa huge snake in the bathroom, Appa!” she gasped, her face all flushed.
“Itlooked at me and I thought it was going to attack me!”
“A snake?” Her fatherquickly made his way to the bathroom and slowly slid the door open.
He wasgreeted by a low warning hiss; the snake was agitated from the ruckus and nonetoo pleased at being disturbed once more.
Nitya’s father picked up the clotheswashing stick and advanced into the bathroom, keeping the door open behind him.
Nitya lingered at a distance, watching fearfully.
Herfather poked the snake in its midsection, trying to persuade it to slithertowards the open window.
The snake, predictably, did not react well to this.
Itraised its head and, quick as thought, struck at the man.
He leapt back,startled, and Nitya screamed.
“Nitya!
There is no need to scream; Appa is fine.” Her father joined her.
“The snakewas scared, that’s why it tried to bite me.
But see, I didn’t get bitten.”
“Ihate it; it tried to kill you!” Nitya wailed.
“Just kill it, Appa.
Throw rocksat it.” Herfather shook his head.
“No, putta.
That snake is scared.
I’m much bigger than it is, and I had a stick.
I shouldnot have poked it.
Perhaps, that’s why it tried to bite.”“Butyou could have died.”“No,no, putta.
That isn’t a venomoussnake.
It’s a rat snake; we have had them around here often when I was a boy.
Now that the rains are back, the snakes are back too.” He closed the door oncemore.
“I’m going to call Mahesh anna(who was a snake rescuer known in the area) .
We must get it outside.
Snakesdon’t live in bathrooms, after all!” Nitya hung back as he walked off quickly towards theliving room, where the telephone hung on its receiver.
She inhaled deeply, andopened the bathroom door once more.
Perhapsthe snake was tired of reacting, or perhaps it thought the little girl seemedharmless, but it ignored the creaking door this time.
It slithered in a smallcircle, its coils curling and stretching like an accordion.
Nitya gazed at itsshining scales, which were actually a mingled mix of shades of brown, not justa dull uniform colour.
The snake’s eyes were like obsidian, and Nitya realisedthat they did not blink.
The tongue forked out every few seconds as the snaketried to find its bearings.
The large window from which it had arrived wasclearly too high for it to reach.
It must have fallen in, realised Nitya,feeling a sudden burst of pity for the agitated reptile.
Thesnake coiled itself and then slowly stretched up, up, up towards the window,but could not reach it.
It swayed there, trying to find a route to the coolsoil and thick bushes that lay beyond.
Nitya’s father reached outto Mahesh anna who was in theneighbourhood, and the snake rescuer reached their house within ten minutes.
Her father led him to the bathroom.
Nitya followed them but stopped at adistance from the bathroom, suddenly realising that Mahesh anna was about topick up the snake.
Mahesh anna produced a metal rod with a U-shaped hook attached at a rightangle at the end and an opaque sack with a PVC pipe attached to it, which heheld in his left hand.
Advancing into the bathroom, he carefully maneuvered therod towards the snake, and held its body still using the hook as the reptilethrashed and hissed.
He picked the snake by its tail and then used the rod tohandle its head, taking care to keep the snake away from his body.
Helet the snake enter the sack and tied it decisively.
“Whatare you going to do with it?
Are you going to kill it?” Nitya asked, feeling amix of curiosity and worry.
Mahesh annasmiled reassuringly.
“No, no, I am not going to kill it.
I will release itoutside your house in an abandoned plot or a field.”
Nityawas surprised by his response.
“But won’t it come back?
What if it bites otherpeople?”
“Itmay or may not come back,” replied Mahesh anna.
“But you don’t have to worry.
Just leave it where it is and wait until it movesaway, or call a snake rescuer.
Rat snakes are harmless.
They even controlpests, like mice.
If they did not live near our homes, the mice would haveeaten all our rice.
See how important snakes are?
Also if you remove harmlessrat snakes from here, this place could be occupied by local venomous snakes,such as cobras or vipers.”Ourlittle Nitya was astonished to hear this.
She felt a new respect for snakes.
She shuddered at the thought of mice eating all the rice.
How could she eatcurd rice then?
She decided to hope thatthe rat snake found a nice home soon, where it would eat the mice but stay outof her home.
The little girl and her father thanked Mahesh anna as he took the snake away.
Nitya sighed in relief once thesnake was outside.
She couldn’t wait to rush to the snake-free bathroom!
वाघमारे काकाचा तो वार्षिक केशकर्तन दिवस होता.
It was the Annual Haircut Day for Waghmare Kaka.
वाघमारे काका न्हाव्याकडे जाण्यासाठी घरात निघाले.
Waghmare Kaka left home to go to the barber.
पण न्हावी म्हणाला, ''एवढे लांब केस कापण्यासाठी आज मला वेळ नाही.''
But the barber said, “Today, I have no time to cut such long hair!”
वाघमारे काका दुःखी झाले.
ते मदत मागण्यासाठी आपल्या बायको कडे गेले.Waghmare Kaka felt sad.
He went to his wife to ask for help.
पण त्यांची बायको म्हणाली, ''एवढे लांब केस कापण्यासाठी आज मला वेळ नाही.''
But his wife said, “Today, I have no time to cut such long hair!”
थोडा रागवून, वाघमारे काका आपल्या शिंपी मित्राकडे गेले.
Feeling a little angry, Waghmare Kaka went to his friend, the tailor.
पण शिंपी म्हणाला, ''एवढे लांब केस कापण्यासाठी आज मला वेळ नाही.''
But the tailor said, “Today, I have no time to cut such long hair!”
वाघमारे काका आणखी एका मित्राकडे गेले, सुताराकडे.
Waghmare Kaka went to one more friend, the carpenter.
पण सुतार म्हणाला, ''एवढे लांब केस कापण्यासाठी आज मला वेळ नाही.''
But the carpenter said, “Today, I have no time to cut such long hair!”
बिचारे वाघमारे काका.
वार्षिक केशकर्तन दिवशी त्यांचे केस कोणीच कापू शकणार नव्हते.
Poor Waghmare Kaka.
No one could cut his hair on this Annual             Haircut Day.
रडत रडत,  ते गावाजवळच्या जंगलात पोहोचले.
Crying, he went to the forest near the village.
ते एका गुहेजवळ बसून जोरात रडायला लागले.
He sat near a cave and cried loudly.
''देवा, मदत कर!
कोण माझे केस कापतील?''
“Oh God, help me!
Who will cut my hair?”
गुहेत शांतपणे झोपलेला वाघ त्याच्या आवाजाने जागा झाला.
The tiger sleeping peacefully inside the cave was awake now.
ते वाघ जोराने गरजला आणि वाघमारे काकांवर उडी मारली!
The tiger roared loudly and jumped on Waghmare Kaka!
बिचारे वाघमारे काका इतके घाबरले, इतके घाबरले, इतके घाबरले  की ... Poor Waghmare Kaka was so scared, so scared, so scared that ...
... त्यांच्या डोक्यावरचे सगळेच केस गळून पडले!
... all the hair fell off his head!
वाघमारे काका धावत गावात आले.
वाघ पुन्हा झोपायला गेला.Waghmare Kaka ran all the way back to the village.
The tiger went back to sleep.
आता वाघमारे काकाला खूप दिवस केस कापण्याची गरज येणारच नाही.
Now, Waghmare Kaka will not need a haircut for a very long time.
Once lived  a poor girl named Natasha.
Natasha  loved to sit outside in the fresh air at night to see the beautiful shooting star pass by as she wished her wish.
Her wish was to live a great life as a billionaire.
On Monday when Natasha went to school she saw  her best friend Lila.
Lila was the only one that didn't make fun Natasha, she was always threre to help her when other students bullied her.
"How was your weekend" asked Lila, "It was fine, but it wasn't the best."
As the bell rang the two best friends waved goodbye and went to class.
"Take out your geography books, said  Mrs Abaru.
"Umm, Mrs Abaru I forgot to do my homework."
"Why didn't you do your homework?"
shouted the teacher.
"This is the 9th time that you didn't do your homework" claimed Mrs  Abaru.
"Go do your homework outside, now!"
After a few classes it was time to go home.
Lila was coming over to Natasha's house to help her with homework.
After they were done they went to the most biggest store around.
They looked at a dress and knew that they couldn't afford it.
After a few hours looking at the pink beautiful dress the two best friends headed home.
Lila went back to her house.
When Natasha went home, she ate leftovers from the fridge.
She ate leftovers because she wanted her mom to save some money.
Yayyy, shouted Natasha's mother.
Why are you shouting so early in the morning mother,Natasha said as she woke up.
Natasha, I just won, what did you win?
I won the lottery!
That's great news Mom.
Now you won't have to eat leftovers anymore.
"I need to talk to you Lila " Natasha said,  I'mlistening claimed Lila.
Yesterday my mom won the lottery!
This means we can move to a new house and we can get the dress that we wanted.
Great for you Natasha,  Lila said sadly.
Why are you sad Lila?
I'm sad because my mom is sick and we can't afford to go to the hospital.
"Hey who said that Im keeping all that money to myself.
My mother and I decided to share the money with you and your Mom.
Thank you so much Nat!
Lila started to cry with tears of joy.
A few moments later, they went to the biggest store around and bought the beautiful dresses and all the stuff they wanted.
And so the shooting star granted her wish after all.
They lived happily rich.
Ummm..  hello mister and can you see me?I am in the fourth of the longest line
We walk left and right always and that to silently and we also make a different styles of lines!
Ahaa!
I got an Idea let's go on this WHEEL MOVING THING to go even faster and that to no need of wasting time !
And we are not noisy than other animals even not noisy as you mister.
Our language is just smelling food.
One of our smelling language says '' Go that way for a tasty treat feast.''
Some of our other smelling language says '' UH-OH STOP!
There is DANGER DON'T GO!''
I love cakes and all sort of sweets, and so do you to!
!
Well, I might be small and tiny but don't think i am a weak I am strong and i can hold big sweets eh!
like this big sweet what I am holding now see you see?
?
NAAN!
don't worry even if the shop door is closed so we can't go in but NO!
we can just slip under the door and have our treats!
Don't even think about it we all live in a big family not just a big family we are living with more hundreds and live happily in a colony
LET US LEARN SOME NEW WORDS.Small - BigSlow - FastShort - TallThin - FatHard - SoftNoisy - QuietHere are some words with their opposites.Can you make a sentence for each pair of opposite words?For example, ‘An ant is small; an elephant is big’.“As busy as an ant” is a nice way to describe someone who is very hard working.
Dhruvi was a very fussy eater.All he wanted to do all day was PLAY , PLAY and more PLAY !!
!Every time his maayi called him to eat he would turn his face away and let out a LOUD NOOOOOO...**maayi - grand mother
On Monday , Dhruvi was busy playing with his imaginary friend Gittu.Maayi had made some tasty Pesarattus for breakfast.
As usual , he refused to taste any !
**Pesarattu - special dosas cooked in Andhra using Moong Dal
But by 11 AM, Dhruvi's belly began to rumble.He imagined angry rakshasas creating a ruckus in his belly.
What if the rakshasas got very angry and tore open his belly.
Reluctantly he took a small bite of the pesarattu dipped in coconut chutney.
hmmm !
not bad!
he gobbled one - and then one more and soon Dhruvi had gobbled three !!!
to satisfy the rakshasas.
It was past 3 PM .
Dhruvi had still not eaten his lunch.
Maayi had made Vadiyaalus.
She had dried them in the hot summer sun.
And then had fried a few in oil.
But Yuck!
pooo !
who tastes something new  !
..so Dhruvi let out a loud NOOOOOO!
**Vadiyaalu - crispy fryums that are sun-dried and then fried in oil
But by 3:30 PM , Dhruvi could barely sit silently.
The rakshasa in the belly was shouting and pounding louder, so much so Dhruvi feared the rakshasa would appear in front of him any moment.
Oh !
how terrifying the rakshasa looked - with red fiery eyes and a mouth WIDE open that could gobble up a child !So Dhruvi ate not just rice and dal but also tasted some of the vadiyalus ... yumm !
!so tasty !
"Why didn't you tell me it tastes so nice ?
", he chided his grandmother.
And at 5 PM, for the first time, Dhruvi tasted jackfruits.
The rakshasas didn't growl this time around.
Dhruvi gobbled more of the tasty fruit dipped in honey because it was simply irresistible.
His mouth started to water.
With each passing day , Dhruvi was tasting something new that Maayi prepared.One day he even mixed some red Mamidikaya pickle with steamed rice and  a dollop of ghee for lunch !
and he didn't scream  SPICY !!!!
**Mamidikaya - Mango
And with each passing day, Dhruvi realized the rakshasas growled and shouted lesser and lesser when he ate on time and on a full belly!and Dhruvi had to no longer worry about the rakshasas attacking him!
And soon Dhruvi was plucking guavas from maayi's garden and gobbling them up too!
yum!
mouthwatering, juicy, crunchy green guavas!
- mixed with salt and red chilly powder!
hand-picked from the garden
And you know what Dhruvi has been gobbling this summer - tasty, juicy, sweet Totapuri mangoes - THE KING OF FRUITS !
from the markets in Vijayawada.
And as for the rakshasas ...they just FLED from his belly !
Winter is approaching.
A bird decides to build a nest.
She gathers little twigs and builds her nest carefully.
After a lot of care and hard work, the nest is ready.
It is warm and cosy.
The bird is happy.
She lies down and begins day-dreaming of a comfortable winter.
As she is about to fall asleep, she feels something shaking.
The bird thinks, “Maybe the wind is shaking the nest a little.” But the nest shakes and trembles and shakes some more.
The bird flies out of the nest.
The next moment, the nest falls to the ground.
The bird sees an elephant using the tree to scratch her back.
She is quite annoyed.
“This is so rude of you, elephant!” she says to her angrily, and flies away.
She begins to search for a new place.
A place where elephants can't reach her.
She starts building a new nest.
With care and hard work, she builds a home.
Tired, she falls asleep.
Just as she is about to close her eyes, she sees two big, round eyes.
They are staring at her.
It's a painter.He takes her nest and throws it away.Then he picks up a brush and starts painting the wall.
The bird is very annoyed.
“This is so rude of you, human!” she says to him angrily and flies away.
Her heart is heavy with worry.
As she flies, she sees a balloon floating in the air.
And another!
She looks below and sees lots and lots of balloons!
The bird looks at the balloons and has an idea.
With care and hard work, she builds a new nest.
This time, nobody can disturb her.
Roja is sad.
Amma is going to work.“I will be back before bedtime, kannamma,” says Amma.
“But at what time?” asks Roja.“At exactly 9 o’clock tonight,” replies Amma.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 6 o’clock in the morning.
“I want Amma to give me milk.
Not you!” says Roja to Appa.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 8 o’clock in the morning.
“Let’s buy potatoes, Thaatha!” says Roja.“But we had potatoes just yesterday.
How about brinjal today?” Thaatha asks.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 10 o’clock in the morning.
“Paati, let’s eat.
Thaatha is making pappadam!” Roja yells.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 1 o’clock in the afternoon.
Honk!
Honk!
Roja’s Akka is back from school.“Paati says I will go to school with you after this summer.
Won’t that be fun, Akka?” says Roja, excitedly.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 3 o’clock in the afternoon.
“It’s time to go home, Roja,” Appa calls out.“Just one last time!” shouts Roja.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 5 o’clock in the evening.
“Selvi, eat your dosai quickly!
Only then will you become big and strong,” says Roja.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is 7 o’clock at night.
“And so, when the cap-seller threw down his cap, the monkeys threw their caps down too… ”
“AMMMAAAA!” Roja shouts.
“What did you do all day, Roja?” Amma asks.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!
It is almost 9 o’clock at night.
“I had a lot of fun today, Amma!
Appa fed me breakfast.
I bought brinjal with Thaatha.
He made pappadam for lunch.
I picked up Akka from the school van.I played in the park.I fed Selvi dinner.Appa told me a story and now you are back!” Roja says, with a wide smile.
Tick tock!
Tick tock!It is 9 o’clock at night!
My Day Here are some things that Roja does at different times of the day.What did you do at the same time yesterday?
Draw pictures of yourself doing these different things on a piece of paper.1.
Roja eats breakfast at 8 o’clock.
What did you do at 8 o’clock yesterday?2.
Roja goes shopping at 10 o’clock.
What did you do at 10 o’clock yesterday?
3.
Roja eats lunch at 1 o’clock.
What did you do at 1 o’clock yesterday?
4.
Roja picks up Akka from the school van at 3 o’clock.
What did you do at 3 o’clock yesterday?5.
Roja plays in the park at 5 o’clock.
What did you do at 5 o’clock yesterday?6.
Roja feeds Selvi at 7 o’clock.
What did you do at 7 o’clock yesterday?
Ball.
My ball.
My red ball.
My big red ball.
I kick.
I kick my ball.
I kick my redball.
I kick my redball hard!
Where?
Where is my ball?
Where is my ballnow?
Where is my redball now?
It is up.
It is high up.
It is high up inthe sky.
It is high up inthe sky.
It is over the moon.
It is gone!
Once there lived brother and sister.Brothers name was Rahul sister's name was Pinky .Pinky wanted a pet but Rahul didn't liked animals.
One day when they were playing ,suddenly they saw a dog.
Rahul said cheee!
shooooo !
Pinky said I will keep it  as my pet and name it Jimmy.
Rahul left Jimmy on street many times,  but he very time he came back.
One day Rahul left him at place  from where Jimmy can't come back.
One day any angry goat came near them.
Rahul and Pnki got scared.
Suddenly Jimmy came and shoo away the goat.
From then Rahul became friend of Jimmy.
Pinky hugged Jimmy.
MORAL :If you love animals, they will love you back.
In Kaohsiung in southern Taiwan, there is a mountain called Ban Pin Shan, meaning ‘one half’.
Strange name for an ordinary mountain, you might think.
But take one look at it and you will see why it is called so.
It looks like one half of the mountain is missing!
Almost as if someone has cut off the top neatly, with a big sword.
Before you start to wonder how it got its name, let me tell you the legend behind it.
Long, long ago, when Ban Pin Shan was still a whole mountain, there used to be a village near it.
One day, a very old man came to the village carrying a huge pot on his head.
His hair was white as snow, and so was his beard.
His face was wrinkled like the old, worn-out clothes he wore.
He set the pot down in the village square and opened the lid.
The sweet smell of fresh dumplings filled the air.
“Hot dumplings!
Fresh, hot dumplings!” he yelled.
“One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!”Villagers passing by became curious and crowded around this foolish man who was giving away dumplings that looked inviting and smelt absolutely delicious.
“One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” yelled the old man again.
“Red beans and sesame, and three for free.” The villagers who had gathered around the old man began whispering to each other.
“Must be a trick!
Three dumplings for free?
How can that be?” they said.
“The most delicious ones, Sir,” said the old man as he handed the first one to Big-Head Wang.
It was as big as an egg.
Big-Head Wang popped it into his mouth and went mmmm….
Everyone could see that he was really enjoying the dumpling.
By the time he finished the second one, his stomach was full.
But he looked at the old man and said, “If I eat the third one, I don’t have to pay.
It is not a lie, right?” He wanted to make sure the old man had meant what he said.“Three for free and that it will be!” said the old man, handing Big-Head Wang the third dumpling, which he promptly stuffed into his mouth.
If he could eat it, he wouldn’t have to pay anything.
The old man kept his word and Big-Head Wang went away happy, his stomach full to bursting.
Soon, everyone wanted three dumplings each.
Not a single villager ordered one or two dumplings; everyone wanted only three for free.
In a while, the whole pot was wiped clean.
Some of the villagers were disappointed as the old man prepared to leave.
“My, my, don’t all of you have good appetites,” the old man said as he heaved the empty pot over his head and walked away.
Suddenly, Eagle-Eye Chan, who had just gulped down three free dumplings, cried out, “Look!
A part of the mountain is missing!”
“Nonsense!” said the villagers.
“Too many dumplings in your tummy have made you think funny!” All of them laughed at Eagle-Eye Chan, who kept staring at the mountain long after the villagers had left.That evening, everyone was talking about the old man and his delicious dumplings.
“He must be a really stupid man to give away three for free!” they said, laughing.
“Let’s hope he comes every day.”The next morning, the old man arrived again, carrying his pot of dumplings.
He set the pot down again in the village square.
“One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” he yelled.
“Peanuts and sesame, and three for free.”
This time, the pot was emptied an hour earlier than the previous day.
The villagers had eaten up all the dumplings, three apiece.
And for free.
Quietly, the old man heaved the pot over his head and left, smiling a strange smile.
On the third day, the old man came again.
This time, the villagers were waiting for the stupid old man to arrive.
Soon, they were trying to eat as many dumplings as possible, for free.
Suddenly, a voice said, “Mister, can I have one dumpling, please?” Everyone froze!
Their mouths hung open with bits of dumpling falling out, as they tried to catch sight of whoever had uttered the words.
Now, which idiot would want to pay for ONE dumpling when he could have THREE for FREE?
There was pin-drop silence.
They saw a young man with a soft face standing in the middle of the crowd, a single cent in his outstretched hand.
The old man spoke.
“Young man, didn’t you hear me?” he said.
“One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” “Yes, I did,” said the young man in a sincere voice.
“But I’ve seen how you’ve carried this huge pot every day, giving away your dumplings, three for free.
You have not made any money in the last few days and I feel sorry for you.
I want to help, but I have only enough money to pay for one dumpling.”
When the villagers heard the young man, their hearts were filled with shame.
They hung their heads in silence.
The old man stepped towards the young man and embraced him.
“Ha!
At last I’ve found you!” he cried.
“I am the mountain god and I choose you to be my pupil.
I will teach you all the magic that I know,” he said, as tears flowed down his old, wrinkled face.
The villagers quickly realized that the mountain god had disguised himself as this old man to test them.
And to find a kind-hearted soul who could become his pupil.
Then, the mountain god revealed to the utter shock of everyone present that the dumplings they had been eating weren’t real dumplings.They were made from the mud that he had dug out from the mountain.
As soon as the villagers heard this, they ran to see the leftover dumplings in the pot.
But all they saw was a pot full of mud!
And when they turned to look at the mountain, they couldn’t believe their eyes!
There was only half of it left standing!
Just as Eagle-Eye Chan had said.
But they had been too greedy to listen….
Soon, the mountain god took his young disciple with him to the mountain to teach him the magic of the gods.
As for the villagers, their hearts were filled with remorse and they cursed themselves for being so greedy.
They named the mountain Ban Pin Sghan – a name that stands to this day – and vowed to be less greedy.
Now tell me, if an old man came to your town selling delicious dumplings, “One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” – how many would you buy?
PAPER  PIZZAZZ!Did you notice the lovely hats that the characters in the story are wearing?
These traditional hats are worn by farmers while working in the fields to protect themselves from the sun.
Would you like to have one for your self?
Then here’s one you can make easily.YOU  NEED:A. sheet of chart paper (about the size of a newspaper), B. Scissors, C. Glue, D. Two pieces of string
HOW  TO  MAKE  THE  PAPER  HAT:1.
Cut out a large circle from the chart paper.2.
Draw a ‘V’ on the circle as shown.
Cut it out.3.
Overlap the cut edge (marked ‘A’) over the other (marked ‘B’) as shown.
Stick them together.
You will now have a conical hat.4.
Make two holes in the hat and tie the strings to them as shown.5.
There!
Your hat is now ready to protect you from the sun!Decorate your hat with fancy designs.
Sanu was a magic girl.
She had a dog.
She love doing magic.
She used to do everything with magic.
One day she lost her magic stick and everyone was laughing at her.
Then she understand that he should not do everything from magic
and from that day she did not use any magic.
Nusha was a little girl who wasn't very good at anything.
But when she was 12, she found she could fly.
She flew to school when she was late.
She flew to her grandma's house on weekends.
She flew to the market because it was quicker.
She flew across the sea to church.
She flew along the beach and saw people kissing.
She flew up to get coconuts from trees.
People paid her to help fix their roofs.
All her friends asked her how she did it.
"You have to think very, very hard," she said, "and you have to really really want to do it."
One day she met a boy who could fly too.
They started to go out together.
Maybe they got married and had children in the end.
Tomorrow I am flying to George.
It will be my first time on a plane
Moru had strong likes and dislikes.
When he liked something, he loved it.
And when he did not like something, he absolutely hated it.
No one could make him do things that he did not want to do and no one could stop him from doing what he wanted to do.
Moru liked to climb trees and steal raw mangoes.
He would creep along the branch pretending to be a cheetah in a deep dark jungle.
He enjoyed catching insects - the blue green bottle fly with the big shiny head, the thin and crisp grasshopper, and the yellow butterfly whose colour came off like powder on his fingers.
Moru loved flying kites, the higher the better.
He would climb to the tallest terrace to get his kite to soar far above the clouds like a brilliant eagle trying to reach the sun.
Moru liked numbers.
Number 1 looked thin and lonely; 100 was fat and wealthy.
How graceful 9 was, even more so when she stood next to 1 and became 19.
Numbers were like an unending staircase.
Moru imagined climbing them one by one by one, racing up, sometimes two, sometimes three or four or more steps at a time.
When he was tired, he saw himself sliding down the banister with the numbers waving at him.
Unlike rice at lunchtime, which often finished before anyone was even half full, unlike friends who had to go home just as soon as the game was starting to be fun, numbers were always there.
Unending and infinitely fun, to be juggled, sorted, matched, shared, laid out in a row, thrown away, put together and taken apart.
Moru liked going to school because many of his friends went too.
He liked getting up in the morning and having somewhere to go.
He liked the big playground but he did not like going to class.
He did not like the teacher.
He felt trapped in the room.
The children could not ask questions, they could not move around and they could not speak when they wanted to say things.
The teacher was bad-tempered.
Moru felt that the teacher did not like the children at all.
Maybe he did not even like being a teacher or coming to a school.
In any case, children did not like the teacher either.
Every morning, the teacher wrote things on the blackboard.
In a loud voice, he told the children to copy it down on their slates.
Then he would go outside.
If the boys could copy his things from the blackboard nicely, the teacher looked at it.
If they could not do it, the teacher got angry.
When he was angry, he would call the children names and if he got very angry he would hit them hard.
One day, the teacher wrote some sums on the board.
The sums were easy but they were boring.
Moru did not feel like doing them and he did not have a slate.
His slate had broken and his mother did not have the money to buy a new one.
Instead he counted the hundreds of ants that were climbing the wall.
He looked at the tree outside and noticed that the leaves were perfect.
Perfect leaves had perfect shadows.
In his mind, Moru counted how many broken bricks there were along the school’s compound wall.
He calculated that if each brick costed five rupees it would take more than one thousand rupees to fill in all the gaps and broken spaces in the wall.
“Moru!” scolded the teacher.
“Why are you not doing anything?” Moru looked blank.
“Where is your slate?
Why haven’t you brought one to school?” shouted the teacher.
Moru could see that the teacher was angry with him.
Moru replied, “My old slate broke and I don’t have the money to buy a new one.” The teacher was angry and gave Moru a sharp tap with the stick in his hand.
Moru continued softly, "Even if I had a slate I won't do the sums because I don't want to."
The teacher was furious.
He slapped Moru.
Moru's cheek burned bright red.
Sudden hot tears sprang into his eyes.
He stood up and ran out of the room, down the verandah, across the dusty playground, through the broken gate and away.
The next morning, Moru's mother woke him up in time for school.
But Moru would not get up.
He lay on the narrow bed with his eyes tightly shut.
Next day it was the same story, and the next day and the next.
No one could persuade Moru to go back to school.
One week passed and then one month.
Moru sat on the wall in front of his house.
Sometimes he would disappear into the market for hours.
He would try to fly his kite from the terrace but it was no fun because the sky was empty.
His mother scolded him, his brother teased him, his grandmother begged him, his uncle bribed him and his friends coaxed him.
But nobody could persuade him to return to school.
The rains came and school opened after the summer vacation.
Everyone thought Moru would go back to school with all the children.
“No,” said Moru very firmly.
A year passed.
Everyone gave up on Moru.
Perhaps Moru gave up on himself too.
Instead, he began to do other things.
He would go to the market and give the vegetable sellers a hard time.
He would gang up with other children like him who had left school and tease and taunt the children who were going to school.
He would make paper airplanes out of the school notebooks of his friends.
He would go up on the terrace and hit unsuspecting people who were passing by with pellets from his sling.
One day, the old teacher left.
A new young teacher came in his place.
That day Moru was sitting on the wall watching the children go to school.
No one asked him anymore why he did not go with them.
Instead, children avoided him because they were afraid that he would bother them.
The teacher was passing by.
Moru looked at the teacher.
The teacher looked at Moru Neither smiled and neither frowned.
The next day, at the same time and the same place, Moru looked down from the wall.
The teacher looked up at him and smiled.
It was a small smile.
Moru jumped from the wall and ran away.
A few days later, the teacher was passing by.
He was carrying a huge bag.
The bag was very heavy.
The teacher was having a difficult time.
Moru scratched his head.
The teacher passed him by slowly.Moru thought and then he ran behind the teacher.
Without saying anything, he took hold of one end of the bag.
The teacher was relieved and together they were able to get the heavy load to the school quickly.
Inside the school , the bag was carefully put on the teacher’s table.
The teacher opened the bag and let Moru look inside.
There were many many books, colourful books of all sizes and shapes.
They felt shiny and smelt new.
“Can you help me to take them out?” asked the teacher.
Moru began bringing out the books.
There were books with stories in them, with pictures on the cover.
Some were written in large letters.
Some books had so much in them that the words had to be squeezed into the pages.
Moru felt his excitement rising.
He had not touched a book in two years.
The next day, Moru waited till school was over and all the children had left.
The teacher was alone.
Moru went in quietly and stood by the door.
The school seemed ghostly when all the noise and laughter and shouting was gone.
The teacher looked up and said, “Good you have come.
I need your help.” Moru was curious.
What kind of help could the teacher need?
He had many, many children in his school to help him.
In a very matter of fact kind of voice the teacher said, “Can you help me sort out the books?”
Moru sat on the floor.
The books were all around him.
There were so many storybooks.
He put the animal ones together.
The leopard storybook would feel more comfortable with the elephants and camels.
The fairytales could sit with the stories about gods and goddesses.
The adventure stories sat on their own.
Or maybe they should go with the heroes and famous people?
Then came the books with numbers.
Moru's eyes and fingers slowed down.
The fat numbers danced with the thin ones.
Two digits balanced one on top of the other like an unsteady building still waiting for the base to be filled.
The multiplication sums looked short and squat and got fatter and fatter at the bottom as the numbers got bigger.
Division was just the opposite.You began with a lot and then if you were careful, you worked it down to create a long thin graceful tail.
If you were lucky there would be nothing left.
One by one all the numbers and their tricks came back to Moru.
It was dark and the school had no lights.
“You have to go home now, Moru, but you can come back tomorrow,” said the teacher.
“But can you come when the children are here please?” Next day, soon after school started, Moru came.
The children were surprised to see him and a little scared.
By now Moru was famous as a ‘dada’ of the neighbourhood.
“I have someone to help me now,” said the teacher.
He put Moru with the younger children.
There were books in which the children were supposed to write.“Please, can you help the children arrange these numbers in ascending and descending order?” The little kids scrambled around Moru; they were amazed that a tough fellow like Moru knew so much.
Moru made the children stand in a line - the smallest children at one end and the tallest ones at the other end.
He gave them numbers to hold.
Now it was easy.
Just like with short children and tall children, it is easy to know who to put where, it was the same with the numbers.
Every day Moru would come for a little while and every day the teacher would give him a bigger and bigger task to do.
Every day he found his love for numbers was getting stronger and every day his excitement and skill was being absorbed by the little children.
One month later, Moru's mother was looking for him in the middle of the morning.
He was nowhere to be found.
She looked on the terrace but he was not there.
She looked on the wall where he normally sat dangling his feet, but only his kites were resting there.
She looked up on the mango tree, the leaves rustled in the breeze but there was no Moru on the branches.
She went to the market but all the vegetable sellers were selling their vegetables without being bothered by the usual gang of boys.
Finally, she walked down the lane and happened to look into the window of the school.
There was Moru.
His head was down, and he was looking carefully into his notebook.
There was a frown of concentration on his forehead and a deep look of absorption in his eyes.
He was busy solving complicated mathematics problems along with all the other children of his age.
The teacher looked out too, and he smiled his soft warm smile at Moru's mother.
She smiled back happily.
Moru was in school again.
This time he was learning more and more.
And most importantly, this time he was loving it.
I see a blue butterfly waving goodbye
I see a yellow bee drinking a cup of tea
I see a red fish in a dish
I see a green frog playing with a puppy dog
I see an orange duckwishing me good luck
I see a violet flowerdancing with a caterpillar
I see a grey and black catwearing an orange hat
I see a grey and brown mousehiding in a pink house
I see a red and black foxwearing purple socks
I see a green grasshopper reading ablack and white newspaper
I see a black and purple goatsailing in a red boat
I see a green and brown crocodilegiving me a big smile
I see a black and blue snakeeating a slice of cake
I see a red and yellow henwriting with a pen
I see a black and orange tigerstanding in the water
I see with my two black eyesall the colours as they fly
I love forests!
Last week I went to Kibale forest.
I saw many trees.
I saw Fig, Muvule, Palm, and Ebony trees.
I saw chimpanzees, baboons, and monkeys.
I saw different birds.
I saw crested cranes, eagles, and owls.
I laughed when I saw a big elephant with a little tail.
I saw so many different animals, birds, and plants.
Butterfly I met a butterfly,yellow, black and brown.Hovering over flowers,flying up and down.She sits so nearI touch her with no fear.At once she flies away,she sits but doesn’t stay.
Thump Thump Thump Thump goes the elephant!Thump Thump the elephant comes!He lifts his trunk, he lowers it.Wading into the water,his trunk becomes a shower.
Bump Bump goes the elephant!Bump Bump the elephant comes!Bananas for his big fat tum,he eats ten and counts one!Burp Burp goes the elephant!Burp Burp the elephant comes!
Off to School Leaves are greenand flowers red.Ready for schoolas you leave the bed.Left your pencil,dropped your book!Pick them upand off to school!
Flying High Lovely little butterfly,yellow and blue butterfly.She looks like a petal on a flower,crossing flowerbeds afar.A wave of colour,with her wings aflutter,she looks so bright.Her quiet flight,in the morning light.
Here Comes the Camel Here comes the camelrocking gently down the road!Such a tall animal!Here comes the camel!With a neck so tall,and a back so high,the camel gently goes by.
His feet like the sand,carrying loads across the land,walking quietly on the sand.When he tires, he will sit.On his right or his left?That is his own SECRET!
Peacock Look how the peacock dances,on dainty steps he advances.All his feathers in an arc,glowing hues light and dark.When the sky turns cloudy grey,the peacock begins to sway.Moving gently on his feet,dancing to the rainy beat!
Food So Precious!
How about some idli-dosa,or a nice hot samosa?Let us eat some sweet mithai,yummy rabri and malai!Would you like some poori bhaji, or fried brinjal bhaaja?
Spongy fresh dhokla is nice,to gobble up in a trice.But do not hurry when you eat, careful not to spill any treat.Because FOOD is so precious,and also so DELICIOUS!
Drip Drop Drip Drop raindrops!Can I touch them as they Plop?Eyes shut and face upturned,for silver beads on curling lashes.Eyes open to see what splashes!Leaves and branches dripping wet.Birds shedding little droplets!Silver sheets on roofs and walls,I see the rain as it falls!
The Race A tumbling red tomato,racing green peas!Stumbling came the cauliflower,not far behind is coriander!Who will reach the finish linein this race against time?
Swinging High To and fro swings the doll,pulled by the bird so small.Uncle Monkey hides a smile,in his hat of the latest style.Aunty Kitten is also hereusing her fat glasses to peer.She also wants to have a goto touch the sky, to and fro!
Umbrella Who went to the market with Papa?His dear old umbrella!He is safe from the beating sun with his dear old umbrella!His bag in his right hand,guess what the left demands?
When the rain comes pouring down,Umbrella-time all around!It gets wet but keeps Papa dry.Like a roof on his head that is not very high!
Paper Boat Let us make a paper boat,in the water it will float!Away floats the paper boatrunning to a river unknown.Dancing on the swirling waves, a little speck as it sails away!
My Pencil My pencil is so special,it jots down letters neat.In maths, it's hard to beat!Leaves and flowers, plants and pots, lions and birds, it draws in a shot!Drawing lines for a house so tall, my special pencil does it all!
Chugetty ChugThere goes the train,Chugetty Chug!On the tracks,Chugetty Chug!
The longest whistle in the land, Chugetty Clack!Not the slow passenger train,the fastest sleekest streaking Mail!Chugetty ClackGoes the train!
My Ball Bounce Bouncegoes my ball!Run Runruns my ball!I like to runfor my ball!Quickly hidesmy naughty ball!
Bounce Bouncecomes my ball!I'm happywhen I find my ball!
A girl name ruby  and his dream friend porcupine.
And she is dreaming she is eating ice cream with his porcupine friend.
Ruby has a broken tooth and his dream friend broken his spines but it's a dream.
Two of them are riding in the paper boat       and two of them enjoying.
And two of them finishing home works on his dream with his friend porcupine.
And she forgot his snacks two of them           are so hungry.
and she wake up and go to his school                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thank you bye.
"Dara, it's almost time to go to bed!
Where have you been?"
Mom asked angrily.﻿
Dara replied, "You know, there is a tall tree outside our school.
I climbed this tree.
It's too high and it's reaching into the sky."
"I looked down and saw white clouds.
I looked up, but I heard the leaves laughing
"I don't think the leaves can laugh!
Then I found out that the squirrel hiding under the leaves was giggling."
"The big squirrel asks me to eat a lot of nuts.
The little squirrel is playing hide and seek in my hair!"
"We played for a long, long time, until I remembered that it was time to go home.
But I don't know how to climb down the tree!"
"The squirrel started calling for help.
You should hear these sounds!
Haw--chiw--chiw--"
"Fortunately, a purple plane flew across the sky.
Can you believe that the pilot heard the squirrels cry?"
"The plane descended from the sky.
The pilot picked me up and drove me home."
"Mom, that's why I came back so late.""Dara!
Don't make up stories and make excuses," Mom said
"Haw--"Haw--"Haw—"
Samira made a face when she opened her tiffin box and thought, ‘Who wants to eat parathas and brinjal curry?
Not I.’Last week Amma had given her noodles with capsicum and carrots.
“The noodles are squiggly and they look like worms,” she said when she went back home.
“I don’t like noodles.”  The next day, Amma made upma with peanuts and peas, but Samira ate only the peanuts in it and took the rest back home.“It was like wet sand,” she said when Amma asked her why she hadn’t eaten it.
“Shall I give you idlis?” asked Amma.“Oh, yes !
They would be lovely to play with.
I can toss and catch them.
But I will not eat them—idlis taste like mud.”So now there were parathas and brinjal curry.
Ugh, ugh, ugh!
Shutting her tiffin box with a bang, Samira went to the school courtyard.
A row of ants crawling along the wall said, “Samira, why aren’t you eating your lunch like all the other children?”Samira said, “I don’t like parathas.
I don’t like vegetables.
I don’t want any lunch.”
“Of course, one cannot eat vegetables,” the ants agreed.
They offered her the wing of a cockroach that they were carefully carrying and said, “Now try this, it is really delicious.”“Oh no!
I don’t want any horrible cockroaches,” said Samira and ran away to the garden.
Colourful flowers were blooming in the garden and butterflies were flitting from one to the other.
An orange butterfly with black checks and stripes said, “Hello Samira!
Why aren’t you eating your lunch like all the other children?”
Samira said, “I don’t like parathas.
I don’t like vegetables.
I don’t want any lunch.”“Of course, one cannot eat vegetables,” the butterfly agreed.“Why don’t you drink some nectar from the flowers like us?
It is really delicious.”
Samira put her tongue into the centre of a flower but could find nothing!
“I don’t want any nectar.
And I think you are fooling me,” she cried.
She ran to the big pipal tree in the lawn.
A crow cawing above called, “Hello Samira!
Why aren’t you eating your lunch like all the other children?” Samira said, “I don’t like parathas.
I don’t like vegetables.
I don’t want any lunch.”
“Of course, one cannot eat vegetables,” the crow agreed, “Here, I’ll give you something nice,” and it dropped a half-eaten mouse for Samira.“Oh no!
What a terrible thing!
Keep your mouse for yourself,” screamed Samira and ran away to stand near the wall.
Some sparrows were chirruping on the ledge of the wall and called out, “Hello Samira!
Why aren’t you eating your lunch like all the other children?”Samira said, “I don’t like parathas.
I don’t like vegetables.
I don’t want any lunch.”
“Of course, one cannot eat vegetables,” the sparrows agreed.
“Here are some crunchy grains of barley — they are really nutritious.”Samira chewed one and made a face.
“This is like eating pebbles.
Even upma is better.”
A kind sparrow at once asked her, “Would you like some soft, juicy worms instead?
Just a minute…”Just before it flew off to get her a worm, Samira said, “Worms indeed.
No, thank you!
I would much rather eat noodles,” and ran to the gate of the school.
A cow was lazily chewing cud just outside and mooed when it saw Samira.
“Hello!” it called, “Why aren’t you eating your lunch like all the other children?”Samira said, “I don’t like parathas.
I don’t like vegetables, especially brinjals.
I don’t want any lunch.”
“Of course, cooked brinjals aren’t nice at all,” the cow agreed.
“Let me bite off some of this grass for you — it is particularly sweet after the rains.
You should eat it with the hibiscus bush next to you.
You are so lucky.
I wish I could get inside this gate.”
Samira was disgusted.
She said, “I don’t want to eat any grass.
Nor any bushes.
Even idlis would taste better than grass.
And I am glad the gate is closed because the hibiscus has pretty flowers and I don’t want you to eat them.”
Samira ran back to her classroom and opened her lunch box.‘How nice my parathas and brinjal curry are,’ she thought and quickly ate them up.
Once upon a time, about 200 years ago, there was a girl called Margaret Ann Bulkly.
Margaret lived in a cool, green land called Ireland, in a country called Great Britain.Margaret was clever andcurious.
Margaret had bigdreams.
Margaret was braveand fought when she thought something was wrong.
Margaret’s mother and father paid for her brother to be educated as a lawyer.
And then they used the last of their money so that he could marry a wealthy man’s daughter.
Margaret was clever and had big dreams.
But there was no money left for her to study, not even as a governess or a nurse.
Margaret was brave.
“I want to be a doctor!” she said.
But two hundred years ago, a girl could not become a lawyer or a politician or a doctor.
Margaret had an uncle who was a famous painter.
His name was James Barry.
One of James Barry’s friends was General Miranda fromVenezuela.
General Mirandahad a library – it was verybeautiful and very big.
Hislibrary had more than 6000books!
“I want to read this one!
Andthis one!
And this one!” saidMargaret.
Margaret was clever and curious.
General Miranda was impressed.
When Margaret’s uncle James  Barry died, he left her some money.
“It’s enough money to study to be a doctor!” said General Miranda.
“But I can’t become a doctor,”said Margaret.
“A boy can become a doctor,” said General Miranda.
“And you can dress like a boy.” Margaret was brave and she fought for what she believed in.
She really wanted to be a doctor.
So she cut off her hair.She practiced speaking in a deep voice.
She put on a boy’s clothes.
From then onwards, no one knew that Margaret was a girl.
She became James Barry, just like her uncle.
James Barry was a hard-working medical student.
He took 13 subjects and worked all through the summer when the other students went on holiday.
But after five years, he nearlydidn’t get to write his finalexam.
The examiners thoughthe looked too young!
JamesBarry didn’t have a beardbecause he wasn’t a man.
Dr. James Barry was brave andcurious.
Dr. James Barry had big dreams.
So he joined the army.
In the army, you could see the world!
In 1816, the army sent Dr James Barry to Cape Town.
Cape Town was a small, interesting city in South Africa.
South Africa was far, far away from Ireland.Dr.
James Barry felt excited.
Dr. James Barry was short and slim.
He wore platform shoes to look taller and padding under his clothes to look bigger.
The people of Cape Town called Dr. James Barry the kapokdokter, the cottonwool doctor.
“I would very much like to cutoff your ears!” Dr. James Barrywould shout at anyone whochallenged him.
Dr. James Barry even oncefought a duel with pistols!Luckily, they both missedhitting each other.
Why did the doctor fight so much?
Margaret was brave,but she was also frightened.She knew that if anyone found out that she was Dr. JamesBarry she would no longer be allowed to be a doctor.
Everyone had to believe Dr. James Barry was a man.
Dr. James Barry fought whenhe thought something waswrong.
In Cape Town, people withleprosy were banished toRobben Island.
The leperswere put on the island because people believed they could catch the disease from them very easily.
Dirty houses and bad foodmade the lepers much sicker.Dr.
James Barry asked the leaders in Cape Town for cleaner living conditions and healthier food for the sick people on Robben Island.
Many years later, Dr. JamesBarry worked in a war hospital.
Here he met Florence Nightingale, a nurse.Florence Nightingale was also known as The Lady with the Lamp, because she would check on wounded soldiers at night.She became famous during thewar because she asked thearmy leaders for cleaner living conditions and healthier food for the soldiers.Dr.
James Barry had been asking for the same things for many years.
Dr. James Barry traveled all over the world.
He worked in South Africa, St. Helena, Barbados, Mauritius, Trinidad and Tobago, Malta, Corfu, Jamaica, Crimea, West Indies, Canada… 11 places in all.
What exciting adventures he had!
People only found out that Dr. James Barry was a woman when she died in 1865.
In the same year, Dr. Elizabeth Garret Andersen became the first woman to become a doctor in Great Britain.
Dr. James Barry has shown us that girls can do anything they want.
Once long ago, the birds had a meeting.
They wanted a king, just like people and animals.
Which bird should be king?
"The Eagle, he is strong and kingly!"
said one.
"No, he has no crown, and when he calls, he sounds too sad," said another.
"Then Ostrich, because he is the largest and roars like a lion," one called out.
"No, he can't fly.
The king of the birds must be able to fly."
"I think I should be king," said Peacock, fanning his tail.
"I am so beautiful."
"You are too proud," said Owl.
"I have the largest eyes of any bird.
I should be king."
"No, not you, Owl," they shouted.
"You go to sleep when the sun rises."
And so they didn’t get very far.
Then one bird had an idea.
“He who can fly the highest will be king,” he said.
“Yes, yes,” they shouted, and they all flew up, up, into the sky.
The Goose flew for one day, straight over the highest mountains in the world.
The Eagle flew for two days into the blue above the mountains.
But the Vulture soared for three whole days without stopping, straight toward the sun.
Way above them, the birds heard Vulture cry, "I am the highest, I am king!"
But then just above him Vulture  heard a tiny voice, "Tink, tink, tink!
I am the highest, I am king."
It was Ncede, the Neddicky, the smallest bird of all!
He had held onto the great wing feathers of Vulture as he soared into the sky!
"You won’t beat me again," said Vulture, and soared straight up into the air.
He flew up and up until he could fly no more.
"I am higher than any other bird.
I am your king!"
he cried.
But out from under his wing crept the tiny bird.
"Tink, tink!
Tink, tink!
It is I, the smallestone!
I am your king."
Vulture was too exhausted to fly any further.
So down he sailed - with the little bird still under his wing.
The other birds were furiouswith Ncede.
They waited for him, ready to pluck out all his feathers.
But the quick little bird saw how angry they were, and flew into an empty snake hole.
"With your big eyes, you must keep guard at the hole and catch him when he comes out," they said to Owl.
So Owl sat in front of the hole.
But the sun was warm and soon Owl was fast asleep.
The little bird peeped out, saw that Owl was asleep, and z-zip, away he went.
Owl was very ashamed that he had let the little bird escape.
Now he only hunts at night.
In the day, he sleeps, away from the sight of the other birds.
When I was five years old, Uncle Wanga gave me a wonderful present.
It was a three-week-old puppy!
The day Uncle Wanga brought the puppy home, I was very happy.
I knew I had a friend.
After putting him down, Uncle turned to me and asked, "What name will you give him?"
I looked at my puppy, and said, "Coco."
Uncle was surprised.
He asked, "Why do you call him Coco?"
I said, "Because he looks like cocoa."
I asked my uncle if Coco was born alone.
My uncle said that there was another puppy, exactly like Coco.
I went to see Coco's brother.
When Coco saw his brother, he was very excited.
The two of them put their heads together as if they were talking.
I asked my uncle if I could keep both Coco and his brother.
"All right," he said.
"But you must look after them."
So every evening, I played with them and took them for exercise.
A few months later, Coco and his brother were big, strong and healthy.
They were too big for me to look after on my own.
So I asked my uncle to take back Coco's brother.
But when Coco was left alone, he looked very sad.
It felt as if he was asking me, "Why did you do that?"
He stopped playing.
Sometimes he refused to go for a walk with me.
There were times when Coco ate very little.
I was worried.
I asked myself, "What can I do to help Coco?"
Behind the kitchen, dancing happily before me were Coco and his brother!
I was so happy that I did not know who to hug first, Coco or my uncle.
I knew Coco would go back to his old self now that his brother was back.
We would go running in the fields again!
One day, Avani was sitting at the kitchen table, watching her mother cook.
Amma got the cookerready.
"Avani, please give me the peas," Amma said.
Avani took a bowl of dried peas from the kitchen table and gave it to Amma.
One pea fell out of the bowl.
Avani and Amma did not see it!
The pea bounced on the table, onto the floor...... and rolled under the table.
Chikki the cat found it.
She pushed it.
She pawed at it.
She tried to lick it.
The pea rolled to the kitchen door.Chikki pushed it again.
It rolled out... ... into the garden.
A mynah saw the pea.
She pecked at it with her beak.
But it was too hard.
She pecked at it again.
With a jump, the pea landedon the soil, near a tomato plant.
An earthworm popped out of the ground.
It looked at the pea, but did not find it interesting.
It popped back into the ground.Now there was a hole in the ground!
The pea slipped into the hole, and got covered by loose mud.
It rested in the cool, dark mud.
The days passed.
The rains came.
The pea got wet.
It swelled,  and it swelled a little more.
It grew a tail... ... and a crown.
The crown shot out of the ground, and tried to reach for the sun.
It grew taller... and taller... and taller!
Avani saw it when she was playing in the garden.
"Amma!
Look here!"
she said.
"A pea plant!"
said Amma.
Both of them looked at the pea plant.
They were surprised.
"Did you plant it?"
Amma asked Avani.
"No Amma, did you not sow it?"
asked Avani.
"Then, who did it?"
they wondered.
"Who planted it?
"You and I know, don’t we?
Try it yourself!1.
Plant a seed in a small pot and water it every day.
2.
Does it grow if you keep the pot in a dark and cool place?
3.
Many sprouted seeds and grains are very good for our health.
Which sprouts do you like to eat?
Sringeri Srinivas was having a very bad day.Nobody wanted the sweet, ripe bananas he was growing on his farm.
Not his family.Not his neighbour.Not his friends.
Not the traders who could sell the bananas in far away markets.
And not even his cows!
“No, thank you,” they all said.
“The bananas are very sweet but we have had too many.
We cannot eat any more!”
Poor Sringeri Srinivas!What was he to do now with his rich harvest of bananas?
He decided to seek help from the Farmer's Centre in Doddooru, a big town near his village
Off he went carrying the best crop of bananas.Surely someone there would have a good idea for him.
A few days later, Sringeri Srinivas returned home looking very happy.
He went back to growing bananas on his farm.
But he did not offer the fruits to anyone anymore.
Not to his family.Not to his neighbour.Not to his friends.
Not to the traders who could sell the bananas in far away markets.
And not even to his cows!
Everyone became very curious.Where were all the bananas going?
One day, neighbour Shivanna arranged a very big pooja.
The priest asked him to get 108 ripe bananas as an offering to the gods.
Shivanna ran to Sringeri Srinivas.
“I’m sorry for saying no to you before, but now I need 108 ripe bananas.Can you help me, please?”
Sringeri Srinivas tapped his chin.
“Well, my crop has just been cut but let me see what I can do.
You may start your pooja.
I will surely come.”
The pooja started.The whole village came to watch.The priest began chanting.
Soon it became time to offer bananas to the gods.
Just then, in came Sringeri Srinivas carrying a big bag.
From the bag, he carefully took out 27 packets and laid them out before the holy fire.
Each packet was carefully wrapped in banana leaf.
On each one was written - “High Quality Banana Halwa, S.S. Farms.” Sringeri Srinivas offered one to the priest.
“Each one has the pulp of 4 bananas.
There are 27 packets.
So here are your 108 ripe bananas!”
The priest was so surprised that he forgot to chant.
In the silence, one child began to laugh.
Soon the whole village was laughing and clapping.
Now we know what Sringeri Srinivas does with all the bananas that he grows!
DID YOU KNOW?Facts About Bananas The word banana is derived from the Arabic word for ‘finger’.
India is the largest producer of bananas in the world.
There are over 120 edible varieties of bananas grown here.
The National Research Centre on Bananas in Trichy has a collection of 1120 banana varieties!
Bananas are high in minerals that help increase brain power.
Bananas make students more active and alert.
Many Indian sweets are made out of bananas - Banana Payasam in Kerala, Banana Rasayana in Karnataka, Banana Halwa, Rawa Kela-Gur Mithai.
Do you know some more?
Lihle loves to spend time during the day reading.
Her favourite book is ‘Jamela’s Box’
Lihle loves to spend time during the day learning her a b c’s so she can learn to write her name!
Lihle loves to spend time during the day  playing with her sister Nikhanye and they skip and laugh together!
Lihle loves to eat some fruit after a long day of playing and reading.
Lihle has a big smile on her face because she had a great day!
Once upon a time there was a beautiful peocock, it’s name is Peau.
She always admired herself .
She is greedy and selfish, because she is very pretty.
She lives in a forest, with other animals.
Since she was very beautiful, everyone liked her.
In the same forest, there lived the crow named Coco.
Since she was black, no body liked her.
One day, Peau was walking in the forest and saw the crow.
Then she suddenly turned away and said  “ eww, I do not want to walk where Coco is there.” Hearing Peau say that Coco felt very sad.
Suddenly A girl, who loved peacocks took a big net and trapped Peau.
Peau was shouting for help, but nobody came, except Coco.
Coco flew and scared the girl and let peacock free.
Then Peau thanked Coco and said” Thank you so much!
I’m so sorry Coco, can we be best friends?” “ Sure” replied Coco.
From day onwards, Peau and Coco became best friends and soon everyone in the forest became friends with her and was very kind to her.
There were a group of vegetables on a cart together.
They all had fun talkingto each other!But today ladyfinger wasvery sad.
﻿Bottle gourd tried to cheer up ladyfinger by playing the flute.But ladyfinger did not laugh.
﻿Aubergine then played the tabla.
But  ﻿ladyfinger still did not laugh.
Ladyfinger was very sad.
Then chilli started to think, but they did not know how to play any instrument…
Suddenly, chilli started to whistle…
hearing chilli whistle, ladyfinger started to laugh!
Theother vegetables then started laughing tooand they all danced together!
Arjun had three wheels, one headlight and a coat of green and yellow.
He belonged to the largest family in the whole of Delhi.
Everywhere Arjun went there were brothers, sisters, aunties, uncles and cousins.‘Go carefully!’ they beeped.
‘Sure!’ he would beep in reply.
Arjun worked hard, day and night.
Pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk,  he went.
Pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk!
He never complained because Autowallah Sirish worked hard too.
Sirishji had old bones that caused him pain.
He decorated Arjun’s dashboard with plastic flowers and pictures of movie stars.
He quenched Arjun’s thirst for clean gas, even when the queues were long.
And whenever Arjun’s canopy was torn, he wasted no time in taking it to be patched.
Arjun liked taking whole families to Lajpat Nagar Market.
His heart sang when tourists chose three wheels over four.
He loved to rest with Sirishji in the shade of a tree outside Qutub Minar.
Arjun never  got tired of the glamour of Connaught Place at night.
He was thrilled by the bustle outside the railway station, and by the crowds that spewed from Feroz Shah Kotla after a cricket match.Life was good, and Arjun knew he should never wish for more.
But secretly, Arjun did wish for more.
Secretly, he wanted to fly.
Oh, to have helicopter blades!
Arjun thought.
They would chop the air above his canopy.
Sirishji would wrap his head in a scarf, and the ends of it would flap gaily in the breeze.
Off they would go, pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk in the sky!
But Arjun knew this was only a dream.
An auto having helicopter blades would be like an elephant having wings, or a train that could zoom off into space like a rocket, with its carriages trailing behind.
One hot day, Arjun was waiting in a hotch-potch of traffic at a busy intersection.
Behind Sirishji sat a grey-haired woman in a dull, well-worn saree.Pht-pht-pht-pht...
A grubby boy came squeezing between cars and autos, selling water.
His eyes sparkled like polished stones as he held out one frosted bottle.“Ma’am?
Very cold... very good... magic.”The woman laughed.
“Magic?” The boy wobbled his head with such gusto that Arjun thought it might fall off.
"We all need a little magic," the woman said.
She produced some rupees and took two bottles from the boy.
Immediately, she handed one to Sirishji.
Sirishji smiled broadly, showing the woman his paan-stained teeth.
He drank quickly and the traffic budged.
“Already the magic is working,” Sirishji joked.
The woman drank too, spilling a little on Arjun as he started forward.
Pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk   went Arjun, beeping a cheery hello to one of his brothers.
No sooner were they moving than Arjun began to feel light on his wheels.
The traffic parted before him and he sailed through.
Astonished by the open road, Sirishji caught the woman’s eye in his rear-view mirror.“Yes, very magical, ma’am!”Now the woman’s saree carried a brilliant sheen, and was embroidered with fine gold thread.
“Magic...” she chuckled.
Arjun’s wheels lifted off the road.
Up, up he went...Pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk... up, up, up!
There were no helicopter blades to help him.
Magic, Arjun thought.
It’s auto magic!
A flock of birds scattered.
Arjun's headlight was lit with joy.
Arjun flew high above Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium and India Gate.
He looked upon Humayun's Tomb, the Yamuna River and the gracious temple of Akshardham.
He saw a giant web of roads, like the work of a crazy spider.Wide-eyed, Sirishji began shrieking with the fun of it all.
He no longer gripped the handlebar, no longer dodged cars.
The woman fingered her beautiful saree.
“Sir,” she called, looking at the rear-view mirror.
“Your face!” When Sirishji looked at himself, he saw a face like that of a Bollywood hero.
His teeth shone white and his skin was radiant.
“We must drink more water,” he roared.
But what are we doing?
Arjun wondered.
Where can we go?
What am I, if I am no longer driven?
Never had Arjun been so free.
Yet never had he felt so lost.
In the world he had known, every journey had purpose, each destination was temporary.
In boundless quiet above all the honking cars, Arjun missed the roads of his life, jammed with cars, motorcycles and buses.
Below, he saw his family at work, dots of yellow canopy glowing bright like beacons.Arjun even missed the rush and bustle of people, all so eager to arrive somewhere else.
Places to go, places to go...pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk...
The woman looked down and thought of the joys below.
It was easy now to forget the shimmer of her saree.I was going to visit my daughter and grandchildren, she thought.
They will be waiting.
They are the real magic in my life.
Already, Sirishji was tired of his Bollywood face.
What use is it, he wondered.
Once he had wished only for this.
Now Sirishji wanted only the comfort of his own skin.
Arjun’s headlight had grown dull.
He felt aimless.
He could read Sirishji’s thoughts.
He could sense the woman’s mood.Lower and lower he flew.
The city radiated warmth.
The nearer Arjun got, the more energy it gave him.
Sirishji became busy again, drinking in the familiar magic of the city.
Every sign and every turning spoke to him.
Very soon he could recognise himself again.
He knew where he was going.
He was already there.
The woman’s saree became dull, but her face was bright.
Down to earth they came.
Arjun’s wheels touched warm asphalt and his engine sighed with relief.Pht-pht-tuka-tuka-tuk...  “Go carefully,” beeped a brother from the street corner.
The woman’s grandchildren waved from a window above.
She stepped down and handed Sirishji her fare.
“Auto!
Auto!
Auto!” Arjun heard the wonderful cry of a stranger.Every ride would be new, part of his endless journey, full of surprises.
I am a big girl.
I go out of the house alone.
It is so dark!..
Is someone there?..
What is it?..
Oh!
It is just the cat...
I am not afraid...
I can see a big dark thing outside!..
What is it?..
Oh!
it is just the well*...
I am not afraid... ﻿*well - колодец
And that sound!
"Creak... creak...
creak!"...
What is it?..
Just my sisterdrawing* water from the well!..
I am not afraid...*drawing - черпающий, набирающий
I can hear footsteps!...
Who is that?
Who is that?
!
It is my mom!
She is back home from the fields.
I am a big girl now!
I am not afraid of anything!
On a bright sunny day, a fawn was racing in a forest.
On his way he met a rabbit, he ran past the fast runner.
Next, he met an elephant and he ran past the huge animal too.
Then came a stream, he leapt and cleared the stream feeling refreshed with the fresh and cool water.
He was still full of energy, so he ran past the crumbling wall too.
He was sure that he is going to win the race and in his excitement he missed a large boulder on the grassy plain.
He stumbled and fell down.
He got hurt in his leg and was bleeding.
He burst into tears.
Hearing his cry a monkey came and massaged his aching leg and the tears flowed from the fawn's eyes.
Brother bear also came and picked him up but the fawn didn't stop crying
Mama dear came running to her baby and said, "Look we'll beat up this bad boulder!"
The fawn forgot his pain and stood up and said, "Oh, don't do that or he will also start crying."
His mother laughed and hugged him.
So did the fawn.
When it’s coronavirus time and everyone’s confused and scared,How is Neema staying safe from germs today?She’s washing her hands regularly with soap for twenty seconds, while singing “Happy Birthday” two times.5“Happy birthday to me,Happy birthday to me,Happy birthday, dear Neema,Happy birthday to me!Happy birthday to me,Happy birthday to me,Happy birthday, dear Neema,Happy birthday to me!”
Malo left his grandmother's house with his dog Kaloo.
Grandma's house was on the hill
On arriving at Grandma's house, Grandma said, "Maloo, lately we have heard strange noises from the garden.
Keep the door closed."
Soon Malo pulled out the binoculars from his spy bag and headed out into the garden.
He scrutinized every plant, tree, and vine with his binoculars.
While looking at it, suddenly there was a huge beehive on a tree in the corner of the garden.
Malo ran over to Grandma and said, "Grandma, there are a lot of bees around the purple tree!"
He said"Yeah Maloo, but I can't make a loud bang when I hear thousands of bees coming in.
It must be a thief or a demon!"
She said.
.
Malo grabbed a long stick and headed back towards the garden.
Then, the bed of the grass fell to the nose and began to moan.
"Kaloo, stop this rampart.
Don't ruin the grass!"
And that is what I heard.
But Kalu was playing his tail out loud and hitting it.
Malo drove off near Kaluna.
There he saw some big footprints on the grass.
Those were bear marks!
"Bhesh kalu, trapped bhalu!"
Caloo and MalooRan over to Grandma.
"It's not a thief, not a pirate, not even a demon!," he said.
"That's a bear eating a purple fruit, slapping honey!"
Varun is in the market place with his mother.
He's holding on to Amma's hand.
Amma is carrying a handbag and a few cloth bags for shopping.
They stop at a oil depot.
It's a wholesale shop that sells all kinds of cooking oil.
Amma buys two liters of coconut oil from the owner of the shop.
The next shop sells steel utensils and Varun says "Amma are we going here?"
Amma shakes her head and says "I have enough vessels at home, let's go to the next shop."
They stop in a grocery shop that has lots of things in big sacks.
Varun recognizes some of them.
There's a bag full of rice, a bag full of sugar, a bag full of dal.
He says "Amma what are you buying?"
She says "I am buying rice and dal.
See he's packing it for us in the bag I gave him."
Then they go past a shop that sells milk in a huge container.
Amma doesn't want to buy milk today.
There's enough milk at home.
Varun points at a shop that sells cloth.
"Are we stopping here Amma?"
"No Varun, we don't need anything from here.
Let's keep walking."
They come to a toy shop.
Varun is very excited.
He lets of Amma and runs inside.
"Amma can I buy a ball please?"
Amma nods her head and agrees.
Varun looks through all the colorful balls and picks up a red one.
"Thank you Amma."
Amma pays for it and they leave.
They reach the vegetable shop.
The woman smiles at them.
Varun points to the shop and says "Amma do you need any vegetables today?
""Not today, all my bags are full" says Amma
They go past the ladies selling fish on the road side.
"Amma look, so many fish.
Where do they come from?"
"The fishermen catch them from the sea and these women sell them here."
said Amma
They are back home again.
All their bags are full.
Varun holds the red ball and smiles.
He's looking forward to playing with his friends.
Lion runs.
Cow walks.
Duck goes into water.
Otter goes back onto land.
Elephant pulls a piece of wood.
Horse pulls a cart.
Snake crawls on the ground.
Birds fly in the sky.
One day,Sheema was going out to play.She played in the mud.
When she got home,Her mother,Mrs Kamala saw Sheema and scolded her for she was all dirty.Sheema started to cry.Her mother gave her a bar of soap.
Sheema took the bar of soap and had her bath.She ate her dinner and brushed her teeth.Her mother was very happy.
When she was sleeping,she dreamt that she was a princess.She dreamt that she was being captured by bugs.
She was being chased by Harkens and Doomsters.
Then,king kenrykoof came to the rescue with his army.
They fought the harkens and doomsters.
So she built a castle to celebrate the victory of king kenrykoof.
What shall I wear today?
Oh this yellow langa is so nice.
Looks great on me.But it's too long.
This red pant is nice too.
But very tight.Ummm.... is this green shirt is short on one side?
Let me try this pink pant.
How about this blue stripped T-shirt?
I will drape the shawl like this.
How about this red langa?
Ohhh..........I am so confused.
what to wear?
what to wear?
Hey, I got an idea.
I will drape amma's saree.
But it's too long for me.
Amma said she will stitch langa for me.
wow, such a nice langa.
Amma got it stitched from her saree.
I love it.
I love it.
once there was a superhero team mm-mega monsters in the team there was black buster wonder lady red rider aqua king and speedy quick superboy  because they where defender of universe so they know every superhero and every villain.
They know the powerful villain but the team named new gods was the most power villain ever they are the creator of evil dimension and the ruler of it in it a normal human cannot
survive a second in that world they 4 are immortals but after they go out of it they can be killed and there weakness is freezing breath or heat vision but only one  super hero has this power but he don't know that he can use it becau they 4 destroyed the his planet  super boy when he was child they 4 came on his planet and use there mega weapon that no one know what was that
when they use it the parents of super boy put him in a small spaceship and launch it and he crash on earth and then he make Mega Monsters and one day they 4 attacked on the base of mega monsters  but it was  veryveryvery difficult to destroy it it doesn't get any of the damage after super herosaw that he was so soso angry and unlock  his full power  and become the most powerful super hero ever
but they use there dark army they were in billons of them but black buster say that I know you all are coming so I already made a device teleport all the super hero here and tick tick tick  all the super hero of world are in the battle ground they beat all of them in no time the super heroes know that they can use the mega weapon so they  use there  whole power to destroy the ship and the weapon
Dhani knew that some big plan was going on in the ashram, but no one would tell him anything.
“They all think that I am nine years old so I am a fool.
But I'm not an idiot!"
The rich murmured.
Dhani and his parents lived in a very special place.Near Ahmedabad, Mahatma Gandhi's Sabarmati Ashram – where people from all over India used to come to live.
Like Gandhiji, all of them were also fighting for the independence of India.
When he stayed in the ashram, he would spin khadi yarn on charkhas, sing hymns and listen to Gandhiji's lectures.
In Sabarmati, everyone had to do some work – cooking, washing utensils, washing clothes, fetching water from the well, milking cows and goats and growing vegetables.
Rich's job was to take care of Binny.
Binny was a goat of the ashram.
Dhani loved his work as Binny was his best friend.
Rich liked to talk to him.
That morning, after feeding green grass to the rich Binny, pouring water into his pot, he said, "Something sure is Binny!
They all sit in Gandhiji's room and talk.
A plan is being made.
I understand everything."
Binny nodded as she chewed the grass, as if she was listening to the rich man.
The rich got hungry.
He walked towards the kitchen with Binny jumping.
His mother was blowing the stove and smoke was filling the room.
"Amma, is Gandhiji going somewhere?"
he asked.
Coughing, the mother said, "They are all going on a journey."
"Travel?
Where are you going?"
asked Dhani.
Somewhere near the sea.
Now stop asking questions and go get rich from here!” Amma said angrily, “Let me cook the food first.”The rich went to the vegetable beds where old Binda was digging potatoes.
“Binda's uncle,” Dhani sat down beside him, “are you also going on a journey?”Binda refused by shaking his head.
Before he could say anything, Dhani asked impatiently, "Who is going?
Where are you going?
What's happening?"
Binda stopped digging and said, "I will answer all your questions, but first tie this mui goat!
All my spinach is chewing!"
Dhani dragged Binny away and tied her to a nearby lemon tree.
Then Binda told him about the journey.
Gandhiji and some of his companions would reach a place called Dandi near the sea, on foot in Gujarat.
The whole month will go through villages and cities.
They will make salt after reaching Dandi.
"Salt?"
The rich got up in shock, "Why would you make salt?
It can be bought from any shop."
"Yes, I know."
Binda laughed, "but Mahatmaji has a plan.
You know that he travels against something or takes out processions, don't you?
"Yeah, absolutely.
I know they take out processions of Satyagraha against the British Government so that they can fight against them and India becomes independent.
But why are you protesting about salt?
It was a stupid thing!"
"Not stupid at all, the rich!
Do you know that we have to pay tax on salt?"
"So what?"
murmured the rich man.
“Salt is needed by everyone… It means that every Indian, even the poorest of the poor, does it,” Binda uncle further explained.
“But this is absolutely unfair!” was angry in the eyes of the rich.
"Yeah, that's unfair.
Not only this, Indian people are prohibited from making salt.
Mahatma ji asked the British government to remove the tax but they turned it down.
That is why they have decided that they will go to Dandi and make salt from the water of the sea.”“Will walk for a month!” Dhani was worried thinking.
"Gandhi ji will be tired.
Why can't they go to Dandi by bus or train?"
“Because, if they walk on this long journey to Dandi, then this news will spread.
Photos will be printed in newspapers, reports will go on radio!
And people all over the world will know that we are fighting for our freedom.
And it will be a matter of great shame for the British Government."
"Gandhiji is very intelligent, isn't he?"
Rich's eyes gleamed.
“Yes, they are!” Laughter streaked around Binda's eyes, “he has even written a letter to the Viceroy that he is going to do so!
The British government doesn't even know what its going to be!
The rich reached the hut where Gandhiji was staying.
He looked through the window.
Many people of the ashram were talking to Gandhiji.
Dhani heard that they were planning their way to Dandi, on which they would walk.
Dhani was happy to see his father also among them.
In the afternoon, when there was some peace in the ashram, Dhani set out to find his father.
He was sitting and spinning the spinning wheel.
“Father, are you and Amma going on Dandi Yatra?” Dhani asked directly about work.
"I am going.
You and Amma will stay here."
"I'm coming with you."
"Don't talk nonsense, rich!
You can't walk that long.
Only the youth of the ashram are leaving."
"I'm nine years old and can run faster than you!"
said the rich man, "you can't stop me from coming along."
Dhani's father stopped the spinning wheel and explained patiently, "Only those people will go, whom the Mahatma himself has chosen."
"Okay!
I will talk to them.
He will surely say yes!” Dhani said firmly and left from there.
Gandhiji used to be very busy.
It was not easy to catch him alone.
But Dhani knew the time when it would be time to listen to him—every morning, he used to walk around the ashram.
The next day as the sun rose, Dhani left the bed and went to look for Gandhiji.
He was watching the cows in the Gaushala.
Then he started talking to Binda, seeing peas and cabbage in the vegetable garden.
Dhani and Binny were following him continuously.
At last, Gandhiji walked towards his hut.
Sitting near the spinning wheel in the verandah, he called out to the rich, "Come here, son!"
The rich man ran to him.
Binny also came jumping along.
"What's your name, son?"
"Dhani, Gandhiji."
"And this is your goat?"
"Yes, Gandhiji!
My friend Binny, whose milk you drink every morning," smiled Dhani proudly, "I take care of it."
"Very good!"
said Gandhi, shaking his hand, "now tell me Dhani why you and Binny have been following me since morning?"
“I wanted to ask you something,” Dhani panicked a little.
"Can I come with you to Dandi?"
he said courageously.
Gandhiji smiled, "You are still young son!
Dandi is 385 kms away!
Only a young man like your father will be able to walk with me."
"But you are not young," said the rich man, "will you not be tired?"
"I walk very well," said Gandhi.
“I walk very well too,” the rich man insisted.
"Yes, that's right," said Gandhi after thinking for a while, "but there is a problem.
Who will see Binny if you go with me?
After walking this much, I'll be weak.
Therefore, when I come back, I will have to drink a lot of milk, so that my strength returns."
"I am... that's right, Gandhiji!
Binny eats only when I feed him," Dhani affectionately caresses Binny's head, "and only I know what he likes."
"Exactly right.
So will you stay in the ashram and look after Binny for me?"
Gandhiji said lovingly.
"Yes, Gandhiji," said Dhani, "and Binny and I will wait for you."
﻿*Some interesting facts from history*: 1.
In March 1930, Mahatma Gandhi led a march to Dandi in protest against the salt tax imposed by the British Government.
Gandhiji and his followers walked for 24 days in Gujarat.
He was greeted with flowers and songs all along the way.
Newspapers around the world carried news on the trip.
2.In Dandi, Gandhiji and his companions picked up salt from the beach and were arrested.
After his arrest, the non-cooperation movement started and people all over India boycotted schools, colleges and offices.
3.
78 volunteers (volunteers) participated in this yatra along with Gandhiji.
He covered a distance of 385 kilometres.
4.
The journey started on 12th March and ended on 5th April, 1930.
The youngest passenger was 16 years old.
5.
The year 2005 was the 75th birth anniversary of Dandi Yatra.
Can you guess who our best friend is?
He’s not like us at all.
Our best friend is Bird!
I am Rhino.
I get covered in fleas.
Bird eats them all up.
I am Crocodile.
I can’t brush my teeth.
Bird pecks them all clean.
I am Giraffe.I can’t scratch my head.
Bird can reach just the right spot.
I am Zebra.
I can’t see things far away.
Bird has great eyes, so when he’s watching I’m safe.
Bird might be different, but that’s no problem…
We don’t even mind when he sings!
Will you be my friend?
The coconut beetle loves to count.
He is counting petals now.One, two, three, four – THUMP!
“Ladybug!” he shouts.“Can you flip me over, please?”The ladybug pushes and huffs and puffs.
But she can’t flip the coconut beetle over.
“Cicadas!” she calls out.Three cicadas come to help.
The coconut beetle counts his friends.
“One, two, three, four.
Four is an even number!”Four insects push and huff and puff.
But they can’t flip the coconut beetle over.1+3=4
“Lily moths!” calls the ladybug.Five lily moths come to help.
The coconut beetle counts his friends.
“Nine of you to help me.
Nine is an odd number!” Nine insects push and huff and puff.
But they can’t flip the coconut beetle over.4+5=9
Seven jumping spiders come to help.TUP TUP TUP.
The coconut beetle counts his friends.
“Now there are sixteen.
Even number!” Sixteen friends push and huff and PUFF.
But they can’t flip the coconut beetle over.9+7=16
“Call the lacewings!” shouts the ladybug.Nine lacewings come to help.“Woohoo, that makes twenty-five,” says the tired coconut beetle.
“Twenty-five is an...”“…ODD NUMBER!” shout the twenty-five friends.
16+9=25
Twenty-five friends PUSH and HUFF and PUFF and… FLIP!At last, they flip over the coconut beetle.
Even numbers end with any one of these digits 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8Odd numbers end with any one of these digits 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9.
Count the number of odd things and even things on this page.Do you get an even number or an odd number when you add them?Odd number + Even number =?Even number + Even number =?Odd number + Odd number =?
I always want to help.
I like helping and being helpful.
I can help my little brother.
It makes him happy, and it makes me happy.
I help my mom, and she helps me.
Together, we work as a team to get ready quickly in the morning.
In the afternoon, I help my dad at the store.
When I help him, I learn a lot about everything that's sold at the store.
But sometimes I make mistakes, and play with things I shouldn't play with.
My mom gets upset that I don't treat her things carefully.
Other times I have accidents.
My dad gets mad that I break his things.
When I make a mistake or have an accident I get sad.
Reading a book sometimes helps me feel better.
But what always makes me happy is being with my grandma.
She says that EVERYONE makes mistakes and that we have accidents because we're learning.
Just like my brother, who's little, and still doesn't know how to set the table.
He makes a lot of mistakes, and has a lot to learn!
I'm already big and can do a lot of stuff.
But sometimes I need help from a stool or from my parents.
It's fun helping others, even if I sometimes make mistakes,
Once there was a lion in a forest.
One day when that lion was in a deep sleep a mouse came there.The naughty mouse started playing around by jumping on lion's tail.
Lion's sleep was disturbed because of mouse.He glared at the mouse in anger.
Mouse got scared and said, "Oh King!
Please spare my life and in return I will help you when you are in need"
Lion felt sorry for the mouse and let him go.Mouse ran from there being thankful.
Another day, Lion was caught in a hunter's net.
The mouse saw the lion and came there.
Mouse freed the lion by cutting the net with his sharp teeth.
Lion and the mouse became friends and lived happily.Moral: A friend in need is a friend indeed.
Father says,“This house is mine.”
Isn’t this also the house of the sparrowinside the terrace hole?
Mother says,“This house is mine.”
Isn’t this also the house of the common mynah on the roof?
Grandma says,“This house is mine.”
Isn't this also the house of the chicken in the coop?
Grandpa says,“This house is mine.”
Isn’t this also the house of the swallow on the top of the door?
Uncle says,“This house is mine.”
Isn’t this also the house of the pigeon on the branch?
Aunty says,“This house is mine.”
Isn’t this also the house of the bees in the hives?
Brother says,“This house is mine.”
Isn’t this also the house of the cat that chases the mouse?
Sister says, “This house is mine.”
Isn't this also the house of the cows in the shed?
Everybody says, “This house is mine.”It is notonly mine,but also ours!
I say, “Thishouse is mine,but alsoeverybody else’s!”
Chunu and Munu are walking.They reach the corn field.
Their daddy is in the field.He is sowing corn.
“Can we help you?” the girls ask.
Father looks at Chunu.
Then he looks at Munu.
"Okay," Daddy says.“Come and help me.”
Chunu and Munu are happy.
They water the corn.
Weeks later, the corn begins to sprout.The girls cheer and smile.
They weed the corn.It is growing so well!
A few weeks later...Chunu says, “Look at the weeds!”Munu says, “Look at the grass.”
Chunu pulls out the weeds.Munu pulls out the grass.
The corn crop is happy.
Chunu picks the cobs.Munu puts them in a basket.
The basket is full of corn!The girls carry it all the way home.
Daddy roasts the corn.Chunu and Munu eat it happily.
Chunu and Munu cheer,“The corn is yummy.Very yummy!”
In the busy city,  far away from a caring life at home,  lived a group of homeless boys.
They welcomed each day just as it came.
On one morning,  the boys were packing their mats after sleeping on cold pavements.
To chase away the cold they lit a fire.
Among the group of boys was Magozwe.
He was the youngest.
When Magozwe's parents died,  he was only five years old.
He went to live with his uncle.
This man did not care about the child.
He did not give Magozwe enough food.
He made the boy do a lot of hard work.
If Magozwe complained or questioned,  his uncle beat him.
When Magozwe asked if he could go to school,  his uncle beat him and said,  "You're too stupid to learn anything."
After three years of this treatment Magozwe ran away from his uncle.
He started living on the street.
Street life was difficult and most of the boys struggled daily just to get food.
Sometimes they were arrested,  sometimes they were beaten.
When they were sick,  there was no one to help.
The boys survived from begging, and selling plastics and other recycling.
One day while Magozwe was looking through the dustbins,  he found an old tattered storybook.
He cleaned the dirt from it and put it in his sack.
Every day after that he would take out the book and look at the pictures.
He did not know how to read the words.
The pictures told the story of a boy who grew up to be a pilot.
Magozwe would daydream of being a pilot.
Sometimes,  he imagined that he was the boy in the story.
It was cold and Magozwe was standing on the road begging.
A man walked up to him.
"Hello,  I'm Thomas.
I work at a place where you can get something to eat," he said.
Thomas pointed to a house nearby.
"I hope you will go there to get some food?"
he asked.
Magozwe looked at the man,  and then at the house.
"Maybe," he said,  and walked away.
Over the months that followed,  the homeless boys got used to seeing Thomas around.
He liked to talk to people,  especially people living on the streets.
Thomas listened to the stories of people's lives.
He was patient and respectful.
Some of the boys started going to the yellow house to get food.
Magozwe was sitting on the pavement looking at his picture book when Thomas sat down next to him.
"What is the story about?"
asked Thomas.
"It's about a boy who becomes a pilot," replied Magozwe.
"What's the boy's name?"
asked Thomas.
"I don't know,  I can't read," said Magozwe.
When they met,  Magozwe began to tell his own story to Thomas.
It was the story of his uncle and why he ran away.
Thomas didn't talk a lot,  and he didn't tell Magozwe what to do,  but he always listened carefully.
Around Magozwe's tenth birthday,  Thomas gave him a new storybook.
It was a story about a village boy who grew up to be a famous soccer player.
Thomas read that story to Magozwe many times,  until one day he said,  "I think it's time you went to school and learned to read.
What do you think?"
Thomas explained that he knew of a place where children could stay,  and go to school.
Magozwe thought about this new place,  and about going to school.
What if his uncle was right and he was too stupid to learn anything?
What if they beat him at this new place?
He was afraid.
"Maybe it is better to stay living on the street," he thought.
He shared his fears with Thomas.
Over time the man reassured the boy that life could be better at the new place.
And so Magozwe moved into a house and shared the room with two other boys.
There were ten children living at that house.
Along with Auntie Cissy and her husband,  three dogs,  a cat,  and an old goat.
Magozwe started school and it was difficult.
He had a lot to catch up.
Sometimes he wanted to give up.
But he thought about the pilot and the soccer player in the storybooks.
Like them,  he did not give up.
Magozwe was sitting in the yard at the house where he stayed,  reading a storybook from school.
Thomas came up and sat next to him.
"What is the story about?"
asked Thomas.
"It's about a boy who becomes a teacher," replied Magozwe.
"What's the boy's name?"
asked Thomas.
"His name is Magozwe," said Magozwe with a smile.
“Oh, no!”
“Lulu!
It’s time to go,” calls Ma.
Where is Lulu?Is she under the sofa?Is she behind the curtain?
Where is Lulu?Is she next to the stove?Is she in the cupboard?
“Lulu!
It’s time to go.
Where are you?” calls Ma.
“There you are!”“I don’t want to gooo!”
“We have to go,” says Ma.“But I really like this one!”
“I really like this one!”
“And this one.”
“And this one.”“And this one.”
“See?
You return books and borrow more.”“YAY!”
Where is Lulu now?
Chicken and Millipede were friends.
But they were always competing.
One day, they decided to play football to see who was the best player.
They went to the football field and started their game.
Chicken was fast, but Millipede was faster.
Chicken kicked far, but Millipede kicked further.
Chicken started to feel angry.
They decided to play a penalty shoot-out.
First Millipede was goal keeper.
Chicken scored only one goal.
Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.
Millipede kicked the ball and scored.
Millipede dribbled the ball and scored.
Millipede headed the ball and scored.
Millipede scored five goals!
Chicken was furious that she lost.
She was a very bad loser.
Millipede started laughing because his friend was making such a fuss.
Chicken was so angry that she opened her beak wide and swallowed Millipede.
As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede.
Mother Millipede asked, "Have you seen my child?"
Chicken didn't say anything.
Mother Millipede was worried.
Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice.
"Help me mom!"
cried the voice.
Mother Millipede looked around and listened carefully.
The voice came from inside the chicken.
Mother Millipede shouted, "Use your special power my child!"
Millipedes can make a bad smell and a terrible taste.
Chicken began to feel ill.
Chicken burped.
Then she swallowed and spat.
Then she sneezed and coughed.
And coughed.
Millipede tasted disgusting!
Chicken coughed until she coughed out Millipede.
Mother Millipede and her child crawled up a tree to hide.
From that time, all chickens and millipedes were enemies.
It is Rani's first day at school.Her mother is holding her hand and walking her to school.
"I am grown up now", Rani says to her mother.
"Let go my hand, let go!
"Her mother holds her hand even more tightly.
There were many children reaching the school already.Some children came by bus, by car, some by rickshaw, cycle.And some came by walking, just like Rani.
Rani and her mother reached the school gate, and her mother let go off her hand.Her mother stays at the gate.
Now Rani has to go inside alone.There are many new faces all around her.
She takes one step, then another.
She looks back, her mother was getting smaller and smaller as she walks away.
She thinks.
will my mother disappear and feels scared so runs back to her.She doesn't feel so grown up and holds her mother's hand and says "Don't go away".
All the students were inside by now, Rani was the only one outside.The teacher comes out and smiles at Rani.
Rani smiles back at her teacher and let go off her mother's hand.
Her mother says, "Rani, I will be here when you come out.
"Her mother waves to her and goes away.
Rani went inside.
She was now happy, her mother will be there after school!
The Clever Crow
once a crow felt thirsty... she was really tired
She saw a pot near a house with only little water at the bottom.she thought and thought and finally had an idea
she started collecting stones and put them in the pot... soon the water rose and she could drink it.
she was happy.
Ved is playing with his friends.
He has fallen down.
His knee is hurting.
"Stop crying Ved" say his friends.
"Boys don't cry"Ved doesn't stop crying.
All his friends are laughing at him.
"Ved is a sissy""Ved is a girl""Go away sissy!""girl!"
"sissy!
"Ved runs upstairs to appa.
"oh oh" says Appa "that looks like it hurts a lot, let's clean it up"
Appa and Ved are in the bathroom.
Appa wipes Ved's knee gently with a wet towel.
"Vedu, I am going to put some antiseptic now, it'll sting a little okay?"
Ved nods his head.
Ow that hurt!Appa helps Ved wash his face.
Ved has stopped crying.
"Better now?"
appa asks as he and Ved sit down on the sofa.Ved nods his head.
"appa" he says "why shouldn't boys cry?
""Who said boys shouldn't cry?"
asks Appa"When I started crying, my friends said that I shouldn't cry, they said boys don't cry.
Only girls and sissies cry""Ved, let's understand first, what makes people cry" says appa"All living beings cry.
There are two different reasons.
The first one is called physical pain when your body can feel the pain like you did when you fell down and the other is called emotional pain when it hurts inside like you felt when your friends laughed at you""Then why were my friends laughing at me" asks Ved"That's because people think that crying is a sign of weakness" says appa "however, that's not true, it's good to cry because it makes us feel better.
If boys are not supposed to cry then we wouldn't have tear ducts in our eyes at all"
"What are tear ducts appa""Tear ducts are tiny tubes in our eyes that drain out the tears that are formed in our eyes""So it's okay for boys to cry?
""of course it is, I cry too" says appa with a smile "and it doesn't mean I am weak"Ved is feeling better now.
He smiles at appa"Thank you appa""you are welcome Ved" appa gives him a hug.
LILY LOVES TO JUMP!
DO YOU LIKE TO JUMP?
LILY JUMPS ALL OVER THE HOUSE every day.
TODAY LILY WAS HAVING A TEA PARTY SO SHE WAS BAKING A CAKE.
BUT SHE WANTED TO JUMP SO BADLY THAT SHE WAS BAKING THE CAKE SO FAST THAT WHEN HER FRIENDS ATE IT, THE CAKE TASTED LIKE SPICY CURRY!
TODAY LILY AND EVAN WERE JUMPING UP AND DOWN TO THERE FAVORITE SONG.
WHILE THEY WERE JUMPING, LILY TWISTED HER ANKLE BECAUSE EVEN BEFORE GOING TO EVAN'S HOUSE SHE WAS JUMPING ON THIS SAME SONG
NOW, LILY GAVE UP HER JUMPING CAREER!
I enjoy skipping with my friend.
I enjoy writing letters on the board.
I enjoy reading picture books.
I enjoy eating fruit.
I enjoy helping at home.
I enjoy listening to my mother's stories.
I enjoy sleeping on a big bed.
I enjoy doing these things.
What do you enjoy doing?
Mittoorvillage is a small village, hidden in a corner of the Western Ghats.
Thisvillage was far away from many modern world facilities and developments.
Mittoorhad a 110-year-old government school.
Today, All thestudents, teachers, and parents of this school were gathered for a specialoccasion.
All the students were excited and all the teachers and parents werevery proud because the students had bought a school bus.
The studentsof Higher Primary Government school of Mittoor village worked hard in theirschool field for years during their Agriculture Studies period, to see today’shappy hour.
Being a hundredyear-old school, Mittoor government school had four acres of land of its ownallotted by the government.
Though Mittoor was an astonishingly beautifulvillage surrounded by western ghats, it was far away from all the modern worldfacilities.
Most villagers are farmers and had very little wealth but with abig determination to work hard.
Electricity, road connectivity, hospital, thesewere their age-old requirements and request to the government administrators.
Ten years ago,Ms. Saanvi came as a head miss to the Mittoor government school.
She was bornand raised in a city.
Thus, she had never got a chance to live in a villagethat was completely under developed.
She was overwhelmed by the problems ofvillagers go through every day.
On one rainyday one student got injured severely and many students got mildly hurt due to atree branch fall on the roof of the school.
The students who got injured werestudying inside that class room where that tree branch broke and fell off.
Beinga head miss Ms. Saanvi was helpless.
She was not abled to transport injuredstudents to the hospital because they did not have any sort of transportationlike school bus or car or any such thing.
The phone network was at its worstwhen it raining.
No doctors were available in the village, they had to go tothe near by city for the hospital or had to wait for the ambulance.
The medicalhelp arrived pretty late.
Though there were no loss of lives, the badly injuredstudent had lost one of his hands.
This incident made Ms. Saanvi devastated.
She was determined make Mittoor village self -sufficient.
She gatheredall the students, teachers and parents for a meeting.
There she shared her ideaof creating a self-sufficient Mittoor village.
She asked to give ideas from theeveryone.
As a part of it they created a committee called “self-sufficientMittoor”.
Even the students were part of it.
They wanted to find the solutionfor basic necessities starting from, road, electricity, transportation, doctor.
Ms. Saanvi wanted to teach students more than whtas in the text book.
Shewanted them to learn, agriculture, money management, carpentry,electrical work,mason work etc.
Villagers were all into it.
That day the entire villagersbecame volunteers and they were feeling very enthusiastic about the future ofMittoor village.
Ms.Saanvicreated a special curriculum for the school which included many voluntary workto help the school and the village, such as growing crops on school farm, repairingthe roof with carpentry work for school, making mid-day meal at school and soon.
She thought ofusing the farmland to teach agriculture to the students.
The students startedworking in the fields as a part of their agriculture studies.
They grewvegetables for their mid – day meals and they also grew areca nut trees in 1acre of land as a cash crop.
they learned organic farming.
They did not use anychemicals while farming.
However, this year was special to them, As the areca nuttrees were giving yields, they harvested the crops, dried the areca nut and soldit.
With the money they got, they bought a pre – owned / second hand bus fortheir school.
This bus was going to be a great help for thestudents of Mittoor Government School.
Not only a school bus, over the pastdecade Mittoor was grown as a self-sufficient village.
Villagersvolunteered for all sort of voluntary works, like road repair to build ahospital of their own.
Today they have a small hospital, a nicely repaired andreconstructed school, a small bank of their own, a good road, bus and autorickshawtransportation, electricity and also solar power.
Good thing about all is everychild/ student is also part of the planning process, and voluntary works.
Thismade them responsible and every student knew their strength due to the exposureof variety of works they have done.
Today they all have a clear idea what theywant to do next for their village.
As Ms. Saanvisat for sipping a cup of coffee in the evening, she is feeling a sense offulfillment and was very happy.
Toot-Toot was very happy.
She was going to the pond for the first time.
Bath time!
At first, Toot-Toot was scared of the water.
But when she saw all the other goats splashing around, she jumped in!
Everyone laughed.
Everyone splashed.
Everyone played and played!
Toot-Toot soon found bubbles all around her.
They were going blop blop blop!
She was a little afraid.
But she soon got over it.Toot-Toot began to jump, dance and twirl through the bubbles.
After that fun day, Toot-Toot began to wonder, ”How are bubbles made?”She asked her Baba.Baba said he didn't know.
Toot-Toot asked her Ma.Ma said she didn't know, either.
So Toot-Toot decided to solve the bubble mystery all by herself.
She flapped her tail in the water...She blew into the water with all her might...But she didn't make a bubble!
One day, Toot-Toot's tummy was hurting.
She wondered what to do.
She decided to bathe in the pond's cool water.
There was a deep rumbling in her tummy.
Suddenly, gas escaped from Toot-Toot!
Pssshhhhhtttt!As the gas shot through the water, bubbles popped up to the water’s surface.
Blop blop blop!
Finally, Toot-Toot had solved the bubble mystery!
Now, whenever it's bath day, Toot-Toot makes the most magnificent bubbles of all.
After her first bath day, Toot-Toot's sister asked her how bubbles were made.
And what did Toot-Toot say?
Why, she told her sister she didn't know!
I am Timmy.
This is my friend, Pepe, the puppy.
I like to tease Pepe.
I tell him I am better than him.
He does not like it.
“Look, I have a nose!” I say.“Woof,” says Pepe.
That means he has a nose too.
“Look, I have ears!” I say.“Woof,” says Pepe.
That means he has ears too.
“Look, I have eyes!” I say.“Woof,” says Pepe.
That means he has eyes too.
“Look, I can dance on my legs!” I say.“Woof, woof, woof,” says Pepe.
That means he has legs too.
“Look, I have a tongue!” I say.“Woof,” says Pepe.
That means he has a tongue too.
“I can think!” I say.“Wooooooof,” says Pepe.
That means he can think better.
“Look I have hands!” I say.
“Grrrrrr…” Pepe says, and turns to show his little tail.
That means he has a tail and I don’t have one.
But I love Pepe, the puppy and he loves me too.
In the picture above find:Eyes        Hands        Nose       Legs       Tongue       Ears
I have five senses.
I use my eyes to see.My eyes are black.
I can see the blue ocean.
I use my ears to listen.
The dog and I both have two ears.
I can hear the lovely music.
I use my nose to smell.
I can smell, the nice scent from the orange flower.
I use my tongue to taste.
The yellow lemon is sour!
I use my hands to touch.
Daddy's hand is big, wide, and very warm.
“Posto, please clean your desk!” Ma says.
﻿I bunch up the ten pencils.
10
I clean the ten paintbrushes.
10 + 10 = 20
I put the ten crayons back into the box.
10 + 10 + 10 = 30
I cap the ten paint bottles.
10 + 10 + 10 + 10 = 40
I arrange the ten books.
10 + 10 + 10 + 10 + 10 = 50
“Good job, Posto!” says Ma.
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to?
I can read to myself!
Here is a jug of lemon juice.
It is cold and sweet.
There are 8 of us.
How can we share the juice so that each one gets the same amount?
We can measure 8 equal parts on the jug.
We can use a piece of string to measure.
Cut the string to the same length as the height of the juice in the jug.
Fold the string into 8 equal parts.
Mark the equal parts on the jug.
Then we are ready to pour 8 equal amounts of juice.
We share the lemon juice.
When it is finished, we want to drink more!
How do you make lemon juice?
Lemon juicewater – 7 cupssugar – 2 cupsjuice from lemons – 1 cupYou will need to squeeze about 7 ripe lemons.
Use a big jug or 2 litre bottle to mix ingredients.
Method1.
Mix sugar and lemon juice with 2 cups of cold water.
2.
Stir the jug, or shake the bottle, until sugar is dissolved.
3.
Mix in 5 cups of cold water.
Here is another way to write the recipe:1/10 juice of lemon2/10 sugar7/10 waterThe pure lemon juice is one part of the total amount of juice.
How many parts is the total amount?
The picture shows half a lemon.
How many parts in half a lemon?
How many parts in a whole lemon?
Each part is a fraction of the whole lemon.
Meera and I are a team.
She’s my most favourite person in the world.
Do you know why?
She’s the only one who can see me!
Everything she likes, I like.
Everything I like, she likes.
Our names also sound the same.
Meera and Ameera!
Things that happen to her happen to me too.
“I lost another tooth,” Meera says.
While I lost another quill.
Sometimes, we can be a little different.
Meera makes up problems.
I make them go away.
Like the other day when it was raining—“Oh no, now we can’t go out to play,” Meera cried.
But I had an idea!
Off we sailed on a paper boat.
Or the time when she started school.“What if I don’t make any friends?” Meera was worried.“You made friends with me.
Now go make one more friend,” I told her.
It’s my turn to tell the story now.
Ameera is my most favourite person in the world.
Do you know why?
She turns stuff upside down, just so I have a different view.
Ameera never lets me walk into a fight alone.
Even though she doesn’t help much.
She makes every day a BIG adventure.
Like the time we had to get out of a murukku maze.
“I know!
Let’s eat our way out,” Ameera said.
Like Ameera said, we’re a team.
Look at us.
Do you want to be our friend?
My legs are very strong.
I can run really fast with them.
And my arms... such a nice swing!
I like to draw.
I use my hands for drawing.
Should I draw your picture?
I can see you with my eyes.
The bird sings a sweet song.
I can hear it with my ears.
I think Ma is making halwa.
I can smell it with my nose.
Oh!
This sugarcane is so tough!
But my teeth are strong too!
It is very sweet.
My tongue just told me.
I can sing.
Should I sing you a song?
Ma says I have a good voice.
Does it come from my throat?
What are the seven colors of the rainbow?
1.
Red
He wears a red shirt.
2.
Orange
What is orange in this picture?
3.
Yellow
What is yellow in this picture?
3.
Green
What is green in this picture?
5.
Blue
What is blue in this picture?
﻿6.
Indigo
What is indigo in this picture?
7.
Violet
Violet is my favorite color.What is your favorite color?
Which seven colors are there in the rainbow?
He loves food, but he is too lazy to cook.
"Yes.
Help me with stirring," says Rabbit.
But Anansi is lazy.
Anansi ties some web around his leg and to Rabbit's pot.
"Monkeys, can I share your beans?"
"Yes.
Help us with chopping."
"Warthog, can I share your potatoes?"
"Yes.
Help me with preparing."
Soon,  each of Anansi's 8 legs is tied to a pot.
All 8 legs are being pulled!
"Stop pulling!"
cries Anansi.
Anansi's legs stretched!
And so all spiders have long thin legs.
The full moon came up to give its shimmering light, and everyone in the country-side was in slumber right after the “Nature Beauty Festival” at Better-Ome.
They would celebrate the festival on the most sky-scrapping hill top.
But in Better-Ome there lived a star fairy, the villagers believed if they’d sleep happily on a full moon day, the next night she will beautify the hills.
The next morning,Tirai and her younger brother Rimu went on to the hills for hunting down the that are re-usable.
Tirai decided to go towards the hill tops’ gardens, that was owned by their aunt who was a green fingered lady.
Rimu went on into the orchid fields.
Tirai found some wood pieces, so she tossed them into her knitted bag that was star designed, especially to please the star fairy.
Rimu on the other hand was collecting tubes and broken toy wheels from the dug up soil to make his train station, when Tirai and Rimu where done the walked back home, the pond near their cottage bloomed, it looked like it welcomed the home.
After a while they both went to their backyard, Rimu was in the wooden house that was very small he had made for him so he could fix and make toys.
Tirai was walking beside the white orchids, the she released a pair of sparkling earrings.
The night arrived as the stars sparkled, Tirai was still thinking, waiting to know who these earrings belonged to, the looked magical.
Then after few minutes there was a call to meet up quietly at the most sky-scrapping hill top at Better-Ome.
When Tirai’s parents and her brother went up the hill-top garden, they saw a small shimmering winged girl who was swirling and twirling, dancing and spreading her wand around with happiness of stars and glittery small crescent moons.
As she danced Tirai thought, “Hmm…Does this belong to Star Fairy, she’s beautiful and amazing!”.
Tirai left them on the bushes and at once the fairy noticed the earrings, so the she took them and swiftly took out another identical pair of sliver, sparkling earrings and she flew up the hills and swoosh!!
Star fairy had vanished in a blink.
Tirai  took the sliver star earrings and held them on her hand.
“I won’t loose them, cause these are exceptional!” she whispered.
Tirai always reminded herself of that night before she would sleep.The earrings where in her decorated jewel box where no-one could touch, she never wanted to pick them as they were delicate.
The silver colour of the earrings would shimmer as she closed her eyes to sleep.
All the time villagers and children are sad, people would say “Go besides the magical hill top where you will find joy and happiness.
Then you will know the true charm magic of Star Fairy!”.
Words to Know?1.Green Fingered: a person who grows many plants.
Loving many plants.2.Delicate: Very easily broken or compressed.
Once upon a time Ms Chilly was walking, she saw the queen saying that I am becoming old so I want somebody to be the Queen or the King to take care of the kingdom and I am selecting the king or the Queen in the competition that is tomorrow.
Ms Chilly thought that I will also
take part in the competition when Ms Chilly wentto competition she saw Ms Tomato, Mr Strawberry, Ms Lady's Finger and MrBrinjal.
The Queen said that the Rules, the rules are when the competitionstarts you should not run away.
I will give you time to think after I tell howthe
competition be.
In thecompetition you will be going to a human and if the human eats you, "youwill be out."
Now you can think that you want to take part or no.
Allfruits and vegetables that are taking part in the competition thought for a while and all of them said I am taking
part in the competiton.
First it was Ms Strawberry's turn but the human ate her.
Now it is Mr Brinjal's turn but the human ate him up, like that the human ate everyone that are taking part in the competition.
Now, it was Ms Chilly's turn, when the human put the Chilly into his or her
mouth he or she spit the Chilly out because it was spicy.
After that the queen said that "YOU ARE THE NEW QUEEN."
The chilly could not believe that she won and she became a queen.
THE  END
Chef Meena wanted to make a low fat but a healthy snack for her kids.
She decided to make a vegetable salad that has no oil but is full ofvitamins and minerals.
She opened her fridge and was thinking about which vegetable to pick.
“Pop” jumped Cathy Carrot.“I am rich in Vitamin A and I’m good foreyesight,” said Cathy Carrot.
So, Chef Meena pulled out two carrots from thefridge.
As she was watching, she saw Trim Tomato rolling down towards her.
TrimTomato winked and said, “I am rich in Vitamin C and help to remove toxins fromthe body.” Chef Meena smiled and picked two tomatoes.
Cushy Cabbage danced and plopped herself into the Chef’s hand.
“I have lotsof Vitamin B1 and help to produce energy from the nutrients.”
Otto Onion peeped out.
Onion said, “I have folic acid.
I help to generate good red blood cells and prevent anaemia.”
Brisk Broccoli laughedand said, “I have more proteins than other vegetables and help the body to grow and be healthy.”
Cozy Corn joined the fun and said, “I have a lot of magnesium and help in blood glucose control.” Chef Meena took onions, cabbage, broccoli, and corn also from the fridge.
Chef Meena cut and chopped all the vegetables.
And added salt, pepper,coriander leaves, and lime juice and passed on the delicious salad to the kids.
The kids enjoyed the wholesome and colourful vegetable salad.
Sonu wore a blue shirt after his bath.
Monu and Rina wore blue socks.
Oh,we are all dressed in the same colour today!
Come, let us see some other colours!
Hereare Dadi's red chillies, don't touch them!
Aha,Bholu is cutting purple brinjals.
Rani Didi has sunshineyellowlemons.
Colours are fun to see.
Now toeat something colourful too!
Yummy!
Should we eat a pink chuski?
Or a creamy white kulfi?
We can drink tangy greenjaljeera.
Or we can have sweet browndates?
But Ramu's guavas are thebest.
Green on the outside,pinkinside, with pure white salt and red chilli powder!
Masinyane uKhosi wafikelwa umcabango.“Umfula!
Ngizoyobhukuda emfuleni, pho ngizohamba nobani lokhu umama ethe ngingalokothi ngihambe ngedwa?” kuzindla uKhosi.Kulowomzuzwana kwadlula uMama uSophie ethwele izimpahla elibhekise emfuleni.
“Ehene!
Ngizolandela uMama uSophie, ngiye naye Emfuleni,” kusho uKhosi ekhuluma yedwa.Washo ngejubane emva kukamama uSophie, “Ngicela ukuya nawe Emfuleni,” kuncenga u Khosi.
Umama Sophie wancekuza ikhanda emoyizela.Kuthe besahamba balandelwa nguNozipho obengakuthandi ukubhukuda kodwa ethanda ukubukela abangane bakhe bebhukuda.
“Namhlanje ngizobhukuda emanzini ajulile, habe!
Angiseyona ingane mina, ngizobamangalisa bonke,” kusho uKhosi.Wagxumela emanzini ngokushesha…waya phansi, wenyuka, waphinde washona phansi ezabalaza ukukhipha ikhanda ngaphezu kwamanzi.Kwenzeka konke lokhu uNozipho ubhekile esokhalweni lomfula.
Kwabonakala sengathi wonke umuntu osemanzini uyakuthokozela ukubhukuda, kwazise lalibalele nasebukhweni bezinja.Kwakuzalele ihlokohloko emanzini engekho olalele omunye.Babememezana bethokozile impela.
Uthe ebhekisisa uNozipho wabona ukubhukuda angakwejwayele.UKhosi wabonakala ekude nakwezinye izingane enzansi nomfula.Wasondela ebhekisisa lensambatheka.
Wethuka, wagijima alibangise kwabesifazane ababegeza izingubo emfuleni.“Sizani bo!
Yelekelelani nangu!” uNozipho eminza.
Ngokuphazima kweso umama Sophie wagxumela emanzini, ngesivinini esikhulu.Wacwila, wavumbuka, waphinda wacwila waze wafinyelela kuKhosi.Wathi ukufika kuye wamuthi xhasi!
Ngesandla ephuma naye emanzini.Waphuma naye emanzini esembelethe emhlane.
Washeshisa, edlula isigejane sezingane nabesifazane ababelila belilela uKhosi enyuka elibhekise emzini.UNozipho wayethe ne!
ezithendeni zika mamaSophie owayebelethe umngane wakhe emhlane belibangise emtholampilo.
Emthalampilo bahlangatshezwa ngumhlengikazi UNoxolo owabaphuthuma ngosizo.Abanye abahlengikazi baphuthuma besizana nomhlengikazi uNoxolo ekuhlengeni impilo kaKhosi.“Uphephile, sinenhlanhla ngoba akazange abe semanzini isikhathi eside.”
Umama Sophie waphefumula njengomuntu owayethukile kakhulu kodwa osethole ithemba.Bonke abebekhona emtholampilo bamncoma ngesibindi sakhe.“Ngiyabonga ukuba sethubeni lokusindisa impilo,” esho ngokuzithoba.
Indaba yafika masinyane enkudleni yesigodi.
Induna yathumela kwbizwa umama Sophie.Induna yalalela ngesineke umama Sophie eyilandisa ngokufunda kwakhe ukuhlamba waze waba yinhlambi evelele.“Ngisenyintomazanyana umnane wami wayehlala ngapheseya komfula.
Umfula lo wawuyinxenye yempilo yethu.
Saihlangana khona sikhe amanzi, sigeze izimpahla sibhukude futhi,” umama Sophie etshela induna.
Induna yakhipha isinqumo sokuklomelisa umama Sophie ngenxa yesenzo sakhe sobuqhawe.Abesifazana ballilizela, aesilisa bashaya ikhwela, izingane nazo zamemeza ngentokozo.Kusukela lolosuku izingane zazithanda ukulandela umama Sophie lapho eya khona.Ubungezwa zicula, “Angesabi lutho, ngigabe ngomama uSophie, iqhawekazi lethu!”
A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim.
They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly, they realised that it was late.
They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck.
She had forgotten her necklace!
"Please come back with me!"
she begged her friends.
But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone.
She found her necklace and began hurrying home.
But, she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut.
She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise, a dog opened the door and said, "What do you want?"
"I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele.
"Come in, or I'll bite you!"
said the dog.
Nozibele went in.
The dog said, "Cook for me!"
"But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered.
"Cook, or I'll bite you!"
said the dog.
Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said, "Make the bed for  me!"
Nozibele answered, "I've never made a bed for a dog."
"Make the bed, or I'll bite you!"
the dog said.
Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog.
Then one day the dog said, "Nozibele, today I have to visit some friends.
Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone, Nozibele took three hairs from her head.
She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the kraal.
Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back, he looked for Nozibele.
"Nozibele, where are you?"
he shouted.
"I'm here, under the bed," said the first hair.
"I'm here, behind the door," said the second hair.
"I'm here, in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him.
He ran and ran all the way to the village.
But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks.
The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
Come Pig!
Let’s play.
Can you find the carrot?
No, it’s not under there.
No, it’s not inside.
Clever Pig!
Wake up, Pig!
Comeout and play.Where is she?
Pig is gone.
The sun came up.
And the sun went down.But, no Pig.
I miss my friend.
My Pig!
Clever Pig.
And one, two, three new friends!
Come, pigs!
Let’s play.
Time for bed!
Goodnight, pigs.
Naresh was very fond of animals.
Everyday, on his way back from school, he spoke with the different animals on the way and waved to them.His birthday was coming soon, and he wanted to invite the animals for a feast at his home.
He saw the frog in the pond.
"Dear frog, please come to my home on my birthday," he said.
Naresh said, "Hi Deer.
Please come home for my birthday on this Thursday.
"The deer asked, "How old are you turning?
Naresh said, "I'm turning 10 years old on my birthday."
"I will surely come," said the deer.
Naresh said, "Hi monkey.
You are always eating only bananas.
Come home for my birthday.
I will give you other fruits like apple."
The monkey said, "Sure.
I will come."
"Hi sheep.
Come home for my birthday on Thursday," said Naresh.
The sheep said, "Sure."
"Hi peacock.
I want you to spread your feathers and dance on my birthday.
Please come home," said Naresh.The peacock said, "Sure.
I will."
"Come home for my birthday, Cow.
"The cow said, "Moo, Moo."
"Dear Buffalo.
Come home for my birthday," said Naresh.The buffalo shaked its head in acceptance.
"Hi elephant.
I want to ride on you for my birthday.
Come home and then take me for a ride, " said Naresh.
The elephant raised its trunk and accepted.
Naresh's mom Vaidehi asked, "Who is it?"
Naresh said, "My friends have come home for my birthday feast."
Vaidehi said, "Welcome.
Come inside and please be seated.
The feast will begin soon."
Friends of Naresh happily went back after eating the delicious food each one of them liked.
Naresh waved and said, "Thanks a lot for coming.
See you all soon again.
Bye for now."
Hi!
I am Neema.
Just like you, I love to eat.
Here are are some things that I eat: Dhokla , Panipuri and Jalebi.
Yum Yum!
Where is this noise coming from?
Oh!
it's Neema who is eating.
Neema loves mangoes.
She loves all fruits.
It is raining.
What is Neema doing?
Let us see.
Oh!
Neema is eating jamuns, pineapples and corn.Yummy!
She says.
Oh!
it is winter.Let us see what Neema is doing.
Oh!
Neema is eating custard apple , beetroot and imlis
Neema loves to eat.
Just like us.
I live in the mango tree.
I eat lots of ripe fruit in summer.
When my babies are in the nest, I have to be on guard.
Come peep into my nest.
See the lovely things I have found.
I love to fly up in the sky, like a plane.
I sit on the tree and look around for some tasty bits of food.
I look to my right.
I look to my left.
I love fish.
When I spot it, I fly down to pick it up.
With my cawing I call my friends to share the feast with me.
Some people shout at me, “Go away, you noisy bird.”
Mr Fox likes my singing.
He told me so himself.
LET US LEARN SOME NEW WORDS.
The sound that each animal or bird makes, has a special name.How many of these do you know?A crow caws.
A cat mews.
A lion roars.A dog barks.
Crows make a lot of noise.
So when some people talk loudly we say, “As noisy as a crow”.
Once upon a time there was a poor couple who had only one child, called Nonkungu.
They loved her very much.
When she was old enough,  her parents decided to send Nonkungu to stay with her rich Uncle Mtonyama.
Nonkungu's mother made special clothes with ribbon,  buttons and beads.
Then Nonkungu set off for her uncle's village.
On her journey,  Nonkungu came to a stream.
She crossed the stream and met a girl wearing rags.
The girl asked, "Where are you going?"
Nonkungu replied, "I'm going to visit my Uncle Mtonyama."
"Well,  Mtonyama is my uncle,  too!
I am also on my way to visit him," said the girl.
They set off together.
After a while, the girl said to Nonkungu,  "Your clothes are lovely.
Please let me try them on."
Nonkungu took off her clothes and gave them to the girl.
When the girl took off her rags,  Nonkungu saw that she had a tail!
Nonkungu was afraid.
She realised that the girl was really an imbulu.
They walked a little further,  and then Nonkungu asked,  "Please give me back my clothes and beads."
The imbulu answered,  "Let me wear them until we get to the next tree."
She pointed to a tree on a hill nearby.
When they reached the tree, Nonkungu asked, "Please give me back my clothes and beads."
The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that field."
She pointed to a field on the next hill.
At last they reached the field.
Again Nonkungu asked the imbulu,  "Please give me back my clothes and my beads."
The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that hut where the women are sitting."
She pointed to a hut in the distance.
But when they finally got near to the hut, the imbulu pushed Nonkungu back and ran ahead.
The imbulu said to the women at the hut, "Look at this girl wearing rags.
She has been following me all day.
I wish she would go away."
The women turned to look at Nonkungu.
She was so frightened that she ran and hid in the kraal.
The imbulu went to Uncle Mtonyama's hut.
Mtonyama and his family welcomed the imbulu, who said she was their niece.
Poor Nonkungu continued to hide away.
She sang this song: "Oh misery me,  misery me.
I was sent to stay with my Uncle Mtonyama.
On the way I met an imbulu.
She took my skirt and my beads.
Oh misery me,  misery me."
One day,  Mtonyama's eldest son was walking in the field and heard the sad song.
He didn't know who was singing,  but when he got home,  he told his father the words.
Mtonyama went into the fields.
He heard the song,  and looked until he found Nonkungu.
Nonkungu told her uncle everything that  had happened.
Mtonyama took her back to the village and hid her in a hut.
He knew what he was going to do to catch the imbulu.
Mtonyama had heard that an imbulu's tail loves milk and that it can't go past milk without drinking some.
So he told his men to dig a hole and fill it with sour milk.
Then Mtonyama called all the girls of the village to take part in a jumping competition.
The imbulu was worried.
She did not want to jump over the hole, she knew that her tail would be thirsty for the sour milk.
So she went into a hut and tied her tail to her body as tightly as she could.
Then she took her place with the other girls.
One girl after another jumped over the hole with the sour milk.
At last it was the imbulu's turn.
She tried to jump high over the hole,  but her tail broke loose.
The imbulu's tail pulled her down,  down,  down into the sour milk.
As the imbulu struggled in the milk,  they quickly filled the hole with sand and buried her.
That was the end of the imbulu.
Nonkungu stayed happily with her uncle for a long,  long time.
I love water.
I enjoy playingwith water.
It is raining.
Rain gives uswater.
I enjoy playingoutside.
But it israining.
I enjoy playing out in the rain.
My hair is wetfrom playing in the rain.
My father is fixing my hair.
HEY KIDS  THIS POSE IS OF YOGA U CAN TRY IT U CAN SEE THE GIRL WHO WANTS TO DO BUT BECAUSE OF HER GRANNY SHE CANT I CAN DO THAT U CAN SO PLEASE LIKE MY STORY ONE DAY MINU SAW HER DAD DOING YOGA BUT HER  GRANDMA TOLD DONT DO U MA
BUT BEFORE STARTING YOGA SHE WATCHED SOME VIDEOS HOW TO DO THAT EXCERSIXE IN HER LAPTOP.
BUT MINU ALWAYS SMILE AND HAVE POSITIVE ENERGY IN HER MIND SO SHE TOLD HER GRANDMA I CAN DO AND I WILL SHOW U SHE DID IT AND SHOWNRD HER GRANDMA SHE WAS SUPRISED.MORAL  BE POSITIVE.
Mom, Should I do something too?
Should i play with the ball
Should I take my little brother in my lap
Should I play drums
Should I ride a bicycle
Should I wear a new frock
Should I fix the entangled wool shell
﻿Should I water the plants
Should I feed the baby goat,Or make a drawing
Should I fly a kite
Or should I laugh out loud.
Teena loves ghee on her Puran Poli.“Amma, how do we get pure and fresh ghee?”“From soft and white butter.”
“And how do we get butter?”“By churning sweet and sour curd.”
“And how do we get curd?”“From rich and creamy milk.”
“And how do we get milk?”“Kapila, our cow, gives us milk.”
“Why does she give us milk?”“We give her grass and lots of love.”
“Then?”“We get milk and you get gheethat is pure and fresh.”
A kitchen is like a science laboratory.
Many physical and chemical changes take place when we cook.
Milk can become a lot of yummy things.
How do you like your milk?
WinterWinter is what cools us downAfter summer it comes alongSnow is seen during this special timeWe don't need to squeeze a limeFor lemonade is put awayAnd hello says hot chocolateWhile coffee says hiWinter is a pleasant timeBut wrapping up takes so much timeI like winter very muchBut summer is what gives the punch-by Nayanika Sadhish
Raju lived in the city.
But in the summer, when school was out, he headed straight for hisAjja’s farm in the village.
One summer morning,he woke up early to the soundof a beautiful melody.
“Kuhoo, kuhoo, kuhoo…”It was the koel singing,from the mango tree nearby.
Rajuthought he had never heard anything quite so sweet.
But where was the koel?
Raju searched everywhere for the bird.
Finally, he spotted it on one of thebranches of the tree.
The koel saw Raju.“Kuhoo, Raju!” said the koel.Raju was delighted.“Koel, you know my name!” he cried.
“Of course!
In fact, I know everything!” smiled the koel.
"Now tell me,how did you like my song?"
“Oh, you sing beautifully!” said Raju.“I think you have the sweetest voiceI ever heard.”
“I'm glad you like it,” replied the koel.“When it is springtime and the mangotree has burst into flower,we koels are so happy we go “kuhoo, kuhoo”the whole day long.”
Rajuwas very happy.
“Koel, why don’t you come with me to the city?” he said.
“Everyonethere would love to hear you sing.”
“Me?
Come to the city?
But why?” asked the koel in surprise.
“Somany of my friends and relatives already live there.”
“Theydo?” asked Raju, equally surprised.
“Then how come no one in the city has everheard them singing?”
The koel looked sad.“In springtime when all the trees are in flower, we koels singour hearts out, even in your city,”she said.
“But the city is a noisy place.
The whole day long, hundreds of vehicles go roaring down the streets, and planes drone overhead.
Our voices are completely drowned out.”
The koel was right, thought Raju.
Now he was sad too.
“But, but…”said Raju quickly, as an ideastruck him.
“If there wasn'tso much noise and the citywas quiet and peaceful,then would you come and sing for me there?”
“Sure!” smiled the koel.
“Then you would also hear the rest of the koels singing.” Raju was happy.
“Raju,” called Ajja, coming out of the house, “are you listening to the koel’s song?”
“Yes, Ajja.
She sings so sweetly, doesn’t she?” said Raju.
“She does, Raju,” agreed Ajja.“Do you want to hear her story?”“Of course!” cried Raju happily.He loved his Ajja’s nature lessons.
“Koelssing sweetly,” began Ajja, “but they are lazy birds.
Mummy Koel does not evenwant the bother of looking after her babies!
So she simply lays her eggs ina crow’s nest.”
“Mother Crow warms the koel’s eggs along with her own,” continued Ajja.
“Even when the eggs hatch, Mother Crow cannot tell that she is feeding a koel chick because it is just as black as her own.”
“Itis only when the koel chick begins to sing that Mother Crow realizes she hasbeen tricked.
Furious,she throws the koel chick out of her nest.
From then on, the chick has to lookafter herself.”
Raju was moved.
“The poor thing,” he said.
“What a strange life she has led!”Ajja nodded.
“Yes, Raju,” he said.“The animal world is full ofstrange stories like this.”“Kuhoo,kuhoo, kuhoo,” agreed the koel as she flew to another tree, and began singingher sweet song again.
Use your imagination and colour this picture any way YOU like.
Use your imagination and colour this picture any way YOU like.
READY...                 SET...                              GO!
I run
I swim
I cycle
I skate
I fly kites
When we play, we useForce: A push or pull that helps us go fast, slow, stop and even change shape.
Friction: When one surface tries to move across another and slows things down.
Energy: Our ability to do work and move.
I wonder ifthere's another me somewhere in the world.
Who looks thesame.
And talks thesame.
And even has mycurls.
Someone with myeyes my ears.
Who even has mylaugh.
Who can do what Ican do.
And can't do whatI can't.
I've looked andlooked everywhere to find another me.
I went down to the park and looked behindthe trees.
I looked around,up and down.
At every singleface.
I couldn't find anotherme in any single place.
There's only oneme in the world!
I'm special, oh it's true!
But not just me,don't you see?
There's only one of you!
One day,  a goat went out in the bush,  and wandered around happily.
But then she got lost!
Suddenly,  she met a wolf!
The wolf came up to her,  and said,  "I am very hungry."
The goat said,  "Mr Wolf,  I know you want to eat me.
But I would like to die happy!"
The wolf asked the goat,  "What do you mean?
Die happy?
How?"
The goat answered,  "If I have to die,  I would like to die dancing!"
Then the wolf took his guitar.
He sat down and started playing it.
The goat started dancing,  though she was still a little bit worried.
There were dogs nearby.
They came to see what was happening.
The wolf was afraid of dogs.
So,  he turned and ran away!
The goat kept on dancing,  because now she was free from the wolf!
Fathi is a little girl who can run like the wind.
She likes to smile and tries her best to help other people.
One day, Fathi and her mother and father went to collect some firewood.
Fathi really wanted to help her mother and father.
But so many things caught her attention: birds, monkeys and sky.
Fathi's Mom said:"Fathi, listen up!
You can find firewood here, you also can find firewood there."
"But Fathi, be careful where you go."
Fathi said：”Yes, Mom.“
Later, her mother and father started to work.
They found big pieces of firewood.They also found some small pieces of firewood.
Fathi was busy too.She found some small pieces of firewood.She also found some really really small pieces of firewood.
When Fathi looked up, she saw a red bird on top of the tall grass.
After that, she looked down, she saw a brown ant on the dusty path.
Later, Fathi saw a beautiful leaf.
The leaf was smooth and green.
She put her one finger on the beautiful leaf.
Fathi said:"This does not  feel like a leaf.
"The beautiful leaf suddenly moved!Fathi said:"It is not a beautiful leaf.
It is a green snake."
"Ahha!
", Fathi screamed.
She ran quickly to look for her parents.
Fathi saw her father.
She said:"A snake!
A snake!
"Her father said:"Where?
Where?
"Fathi said:"There!
There!"
Her father used a stick to chase that green snake.The green snake slithered away.
Fathi's father said "Fathi, you are safe now, we can go and look for your mother and tell her the story of the green snake"
Fathi's mother said, "i'm glad the green snake did not bite you"
"However next time, please be careful where you go.
"The End...
Due to the coronavirus all the schools have shut down.
Lockdown for months and decreation od food.
It has also affected students learning.
Students are online for hours many people lost their jobs and money more things are affected.lets
lets take a look about a girl who loved online class
Siya was slepping when here mom called her Siya Siya come down and get ready for online class .
Siya woke up happily and ran down it wasnearing to 8  and was was loging in to zoom her clas had started.
She said good morning ma'am.It was first period and siya started watching videos on google and when her teacher called her nam she was frightened  beacause shen did no what miss was doing.
She quickley offed he camera and muted her mike then she understood that always pay attention whetere it is online or offline class.And the paid attention and give the perfect answers.Aand remember when you come from otside wash you hand , Keep a distance of 2ft Wear a mask and stay in you house as long as you can🤩
The lesson finished.The students are going.And so are the teachers.Each to his home.
I went out of the gate.I am in a hurry.I do not have time to play.I do not have time to talk.I want to go home quickly.
I walked through the alley.That narrow alley.I can see the crowds in front.There is a wide road over there.
There is a large traffic on a large road.Cars, trucks, bicycles, motorcycles and trolleys.Some are moving in this direction.
Others are in that direction.I know how to go through the gaps between cars to go to the other side.
I reached the road divider.There is traffic in front of me.There is traffic behind me.I have to be careful.
I am on the other side now.I almost ran into a vendor.He yelled at me, so I said "Sorry" as I ran away.
I passed by the shops.In them are people buying different items.There is a game shop.
I cannot stop.
I walked faster and faster.I found fish shops, big fish and little fish, long fish and fat fish.Bright colored fish and dull colored fish, each shop has many fish.
Now I must run.Passing by video shops and also barber shops.Passing by clothes shops and dairy shops.I ran and ran and ran in the alley.
Finally I arrived at home.Oh awesome!
I am not late.My dad goes to work in the afternoon.His bicycle is still here so my father did not leave yet.
My father came out of the house, my mother following him.I hugged my father tightly and he embraced me tightly too.Afterwards he went to work, now I don't need to rush, I have a lot of time.
Toyi and her husband are educated, God fearing and respectful.
One day as they were travelling to Lagos for holiday, on theIr way, they met a girl crying and they asked her what the problem was.
She told them that she was an orphan and that her uncle sent her away.
The couple decided to take her to their house and put her in school.
The girl gained admission into University, graduated thereafter as a Pilot.
When Toyi retired and lost her husband, the orphan girl built a house for Toyi.
She also built an Orphanage Home and school for the orphans to make sure they go to school too.
She built the Orphanage Home for the orphans, because she did not want them to go through what she went through as a child.
Because she wants every child to have the opportunity of going to school and achieving  his or her purpose as her.
For the very first time, Maaloo is collecting vegetables from the garden.
He has collected red tomatoes, fresh brinjals and green lady's fingers.
Dadi says, “Well done, Maaloo!
Go and get some potatoes too.”
Maaloo looked at all the trees, creepers and plants.
Not a single potato could he see.
“Dadi, the potatoes aren’t ready yet,” said Maaloo, putting the empty basket down.
“No Maaloo, there are plenty of potatoes.
Look carefully,” said Dadi.
Maaloo went into the garden once more.
Kaaloo followed him.
Maaloo was looking for potatoes when he heard, “Woof!
Woof!”
“Kaaloo!
Stop, Kaaloo!” yelled Maaloo, running behind him.
“Don’t spoil the garden.” Maaloo saw that Kaaloo was digging away and what do you think was coming out of the mud?Big fat potatoes!
“Well done, Kaaloo.
You found the potatoes!” laughed Maaloo, filling his basket with potatoes.
'Plink plink plink' dripped the water from the hydraulic ram.
After a while, water rushed out of the delivery tube and into the pitcher.
A girl named Kayal, younger than 18 years, was pumping the handle as hard as she could to get water for use.
She was a remarkable-looking girl with a neverending curiosity.
She wondered how the pressure applied to the handle made the water come out of the delivery tube.
As she pondered and stood like a statue, a voice called out," Kayal, Kayal, hey Kayalvilli, the pitcher is brimming over with water."
Kayal was brought back to reality.
She said to her friend," Oh, how much water got wasted.
I didn't notice."
Her friend said," Hurry up and come.
Your brother would have been waiting for you."
Kayal had a younger brother named Gaurav.
He was responsible and self-reliant and looked after his chores since their mother had left.
Her father was caring and supportive in a roundabout way and not an authoritarian, but he strictly believed in the village's prevailing old custom of marrying girls at 18 - 20.
He wanted his daughter to do the same and have a good life.
He was greatly concerned about Kayal as he knew she had an idea of delaying her marriage.
When she reached home after spending an hour pumping out water, her father handed over her that weekend's magazine.
Kayal had a specific interest in reading and writing articles.
She grabbed it, ran straight into her room, sat on her bed, and started reading it.
Every week in those magazines, pages numbered 5 and 6 exclusively had the details of people who had achieved something or had done something beneficial to society.
That week, the magazine contained a report about a woman striving hard to bring awareness about the traffic rules among the citizens.
As she read through the article, an unusual thought struck her mind.
She wondered how her life would be after marriage.
She thought, "Will I be able to do something useful for the society like this woman?
If I get married, I will be an ordinary girl from our village."
Her thoughts didn't last long.
She dressed and rushed to the market with her brother to buy essentials.
The next morning, she had to attend her relative's marriage.
Kayal, her father, and her brother packed off to the relative's house.
There she had a little conversation with the bride.
The bride was just a year and a half older than her.
Just like Kayal, she was also worried about her future.
Both the young ladies had the same vision, but the bride wasn't allowed to make out her dreams.
Kayal started fearing that she would have to meet the same fate shortly.
That evening, she hesitantly started a conversation with her father.
She asked," Papa, Is there any girl in our village who didn't marry at a young age ?"
"What do you mean by young age?
18 - 20's the appropriate one.
", replied her father.
Then she indirectly tried to ask if she could pursue her dreams instead of marrying into another household.
But the reply was as expected.
Her father got raged upon hearing her unseemly thought.
He stood up and headed to the gate to leave for work.
Day by day, her thoughts grew stronger.
She wanted to contribute much to society, but many hurdles stopped her from doing so.
She even wanted to pursue higher studies.
The next morning, Kayal saw her brother slouched in their backyard, burying his nose inside a detective novel.
Kayal questioned him mockingly,"Hey, bookworm!
What are you still crawling about?
Aren't you going to prepare yourself for school?"
He replied,"It's none of your business, lady gangster.
Aren't you going to pump water out?
Isn't it your only job?"
Kayal gave a death stare at her brother and left the place.
One day, she lounged in her bed and thought about what should be her first step.
She concluded that the utmost she could do is writing articles.
She knew that her father would not allow her to do such jobs.
So she kept it a secret.
She consulted her old friend Vilas who worked as a journalist in a publishing company.
She asked," Vilas, it's been a long since the last time we met.
How are you?
Could you please do me a favor?"
" It's true.
I'm fine.
How may I help you ?
", replied Vilas.
Kayal continued," You know, these days I'm particularly interested in writing articles.
I wanted to do something beneficial for others.
So, I chose this way.
I have read many magazines.
They inspired and motivated me.
And now I want to do the same.
I would like to document the lives of people who have contributed to society and also create some fiction.
I hope the other citizens would read mine and get inspired too."
He asked," Great!
But I heard that your father respects the traditions of our village and so he wouldn't let you do this.
What happens in the dark comes to light one day.
When he learns the truth, Won't he be mad at us?."
Kayal said pleasingly," I know.
Still, should I be like this for my whole life?
At a certain age, I will marry someone.
But now I want to achieve.
Couldn't you lend me your help?
I won't let my father know this.
I will write articles using a pen name and I need you to take them to your company and publish them."
Kayal, with her heroic and pleasing talk, managed to convince Vilas.
The next day, she started writing articles under the name "Mathi".
Days passed.
Everything happened well just like she aspired.
People started showing more interest in her articles.
Especially, youth were engaged in reading hers.Everything went well, until one day, the truth unfurled.
The young girl wasn't allowed to own a phone.
So she had to communicate with Vilas only through letters or when she saw him outdoors.
One afternoon, Vilas posted a letter asking Kayal for her this week's writing.
The next day, unfortunately, the letter reached the hands of her father.
Once he had been through with the letter, he tore it into craps and threw them in the dustbin.
His next action was to go search for the girl.
He found her in the bedroom and glared wrathfully at her.
Just by looking at his eyes, she figured out what had happened.
He looked at her with disapproving eyes.
But the man didn't shout at her.
He said disappointed,"Finally, you've misused the freedom that I gave you.
I insisted on not doing anything beyond our ability.
Why don't you listen?
Your mother was also like this.
She always focused on giving her best to the outer world and had less time to spend with her family.
The elders from our village always disapproved of her actions.
But I wasn't that resistive.
And now you turn out just like her.
I will never encourage what you are doing now.
Just drop your thoughts and try to cope with normal life."
As soon as he completed speaking, he turned away and left the room.
Kayal was able to understand his feelings.
She knew her father didn't want her to be seen as different from others.
But her obstinate nature made her continue writing reports.
After the conversation with her father, Kayal came up with the idea of writing about her mother.
Again one fine evening, a neighbor came rushing to Kayal's father.
He carried a magazine in his hand, took a heavy breath, and started,"Pleasent evening Mr.Kumar, I came rushing seven blocks all the way to convey you an important news.
Have you read the article published this week under the pen name Mathi ?"
Kayal's father showed no interest as he had known the whole truth by now.
Then the man continued,"If my guess isn't wrong then it should be the biography of Mrs.Kumar.
The one who wrote this article should truly aspire your wife."
The man departed after leaving the magazine with Kayal's father.
He started to read the magazine absent-minded but soon found himself lost in the writing.
It shared the story of a married women who strove hard for achieving her goal of upbringing the society.
She engaged herself in organic farming and sold the yields for lowest reasonable prices in the market.
Soon she became member of a self-help group and was able to avail a loan from bank which helped her in expanding her business.
Then she hired more women workers who together made a revolution.
Though she took a good care of her family she was blamed by her relatives for not being a responsible mother.
But this did not stop her.
She endured the pain just by her husband's support and moved on to fill hundreds of stomach with food and hundreds of faces with smile.
The article ended saying,"Every successful woman has a man behind her.
This woman is a real achiever.
Written by -Mathi" Tears rolled down the eyes of Mr.Kumar.
For a minute, pictures of their past flashed before his eyes.
He realised that he had done a mistake.
He should have been the one supporting his daughter from beside.
He ran straight into Kayal's bedroom where Kayal was busy writing her next article.
He said from behind,"Sorry Kayal, I failed as a father once and I no more want to."
Kayal looked straight into her father's eyes.
His eyes spoke everything.
He hugged his daughter and promised to be the one beside her always.
He said in a stuttering voice,"You did a great job, Mathi."
THE END
Hinawent to the farm with her father.
Herfather got busy with his work.
Hina started walking in the farm.
Shesaw a peacock in the farm.
She started walking towards the peacock.
Suddenly, it started raining lightly.
Seeingthe rain, the peacock started dancing.
Seeing the peacock, Hina also started dancing.
Thepeacock forgot to dance.
It just stood there watching Hina dance!
Once upon a time, there lived a group of children near a huge city.
There was a large park near their houseThe park was very strange.
It had no trees, no plants - only garbage and waste!The whole city's trash was dumped in the park.
The children did not go to school.
They spent their days roaming and playing in the park.They would find plastic bottles and bits of cloth from the garbage.Thus, they knew a lot about garbage!
One day, Didi arrived at the garbage-filled park.
She wore a red scarf around her neck.Looking at the roaming children, she sat at a place near them.She took something out from her bag and started looking at it.
At first, the children stared from a distance.
Gradually they crept closer to have a better look.Didi had a lot of books!
Thick ones, thin ones, colorful and full of stories!The children kept creeping closer to Didi, attracted to what they saw.
Didi came to the park each day.
The children too kept on visiting her regularly.They listened to lots of stories from her and in no time they could read letters and words as well!Gradually, they were able to read the stories too.
The children decided to improve the place where Didi sat.
They found a table and a chair from the garbage for her.One brought a mat, another brought a curtain.
Bits and pieces of things were brought whenever they were found.
One day Didi did not come.
She did not appear the next day either.The anxious children kept on waiting for her.Talking among themselves, they started reading.
Gradually they started teaching each other too!
One day the children found Didi's address in a book.
Immediately they set out to find her, taking the bag of books along with them.In their search, they read and understood a bus' number.
Next, a road's name was spoken out loud by them, since Didi had taught them everything!
Where is Didi's house?
Is it there or over there?A long search exhausted the children.
They were about to give up and return when someone saw a red scarf!
Didi was lying on a bed.
She was ill and looked sad.She had no smile, no glow on her face.
The doctor had given her medicines but she was not getting well.
The children ran to her and hugged her dearly.They showed her the bag of books and read out loud to her.Didi started to smile and her face brightened up.
Her eyes started to glow.
Didi has started to come again.
The children have all started to gather again too!They meet each evening.
They laugh a lot and read even more.
Together, they have fun - Didi, her children and their books!
Little Cicada loved to sing.
But her song was always the same.
She wanted to learn a new song!
So she decided to visit Kingfisher to learn to sing his song.
“Doo-oo-oo!
Doo-oo-oo!” sang Kingfisher.But Little Cicada could not sing his song.
She then visited Mynah.
Maybe she could learn to sing Mynah's  song.
“Keak!
Kaek!
Kaek!” sang Mynah.But Cicada could not sing Mynah's song.
She then visited Cricket.
Cicada was determined to learn a new song!
“Krik krik krik!
Krik krik krik!” sang Cricket.But Cicada could not sing Cricket's song, either.
Then it started to rain.The ducks sang, “Quack!
Quack!
Quack!”
Frog came out and croaked,“Ribbit!
Ribbit!
Ribbit!”
All the animals came out.
And they all sang their songs.“Doo-oo-oo!
Doo-oo-oo!”“Keak!
Kaek!
Kaek!” “Krik krik krik!
Krik krik krik!”“Quack!
Quack!
Quack!”“Ribbit!
Ribbit!
Ribbit!”
Cicada listened to all the songs.None of the other songs sounded like hers.So she started to sing.“Yaeng!
Yaeng!
Yaeng!”
All the animals sang together!“Doo-oo-oo!
Doo-oo-oo!”“Keak!
Kaek!
Kaek!”“Krik krik krik!
Krik krik krik!”“Quack!
Quack!
Quack!”“Ribbit!
Ribbit!
Ribbit!”“Yaeng!
Yaeng!
Yaeng!”
Since then, Cicada has enjoyed her song.Sometimes she even makes up new songs,songs that only she can sing.
Long, long ago, Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind were fighting.
The trouble was that Sun wanted to shine the whole day.
Moon wanted to shine her light every day.
Rain wanted to rain every day, and Wind wanted to blow every day.
They didn't want to give each other a chance.
They decided to sit together and talk about it.
Sun asked Moon, "What do you do that helps the earth?"
Moon answered, "I shine at night so that the animals can hunt."
Moon asked Rain, "What do you do that helps the earth?"
Rain answered, "I give the earth water so that the trees and plants can grow well.
I give water for animals to drink."
Rain asked Wind, "What do you do that helps the earth?"
Wind answered, "I sweep the earth clean.
I scatter the rain over the whole earth."
Wind asked Sun, "What do you do that helps the earth?"
Sun answered, "I give the earth light and warmth, so that animals and plants can live."
Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind listened carefully to each other.
Then Sun said, "It is true that each of us helps the earth in our own special way."
"Yes", said Moon, "Not one of us is better than the others."
"We can work together," said Rain.
Wind said, "Then let us share the days."
They all agreed.
And that is why you sometimes see the moon when the sun is shining.
And sometimes you feel the wind when it is raining.
Sun, Moon, Rain and Wind work very well together.
They understand each other.
Do you like the sun, moon, the rain or the wind?
Draw the one you like best.
The wind roars.
It roars past our home.
The wind is powerful.
It tears my kite from my hand.
I run after my kite.
The wind blows me away from the kite!
The wind becomesa tornado.
It carries my kite higher and higher.
The tornado swallows me up!
I see nothing, I touch nothing.
Where is my kite now?
Perhaps it is caught in a tree.
Perhaps my kite is still flying in the sky.
The wind finally dies down.
I am still spinning.
When I stop spinning I look around.
Where did the wind go?
I cannot see my kite anywhere.
I cannot hear the wind anymore.
Perhaps tomorrowI will find my kite.
Now, I must go home, before the wind starts to roar again.
Biltu sees flying birds everyday in school ways.
He also wants to fly in the sky.
He wants to see his school, Pintu, Munni, Bubla and the candy aunty of his school from the sky.
He starts to mimic birds flying in the way.
He always move his hands and run in speed, more speed and more.
"Husssssssssssssssss" he shouts when he flies.
One night he was practicing flying in his bedroom.
He was running from study table to bed and from bed to study table. "
Hussssssssssss.... Move away, Biltu the bird is coming, Traaa, Traaa..." He tried to make his birding voice.
Suddenly he realized that his feet were not on the floor.
He was flying, "YES, YES, I AM FLYING MAA" He shouted and flew away from the room.
He shouted " PINTU, MUNNA, BUBLA, where are you?
Look, I am flying.
I can see your house."
Gopal Uncle's shop is looking so tiny.
He saw his school, the JHULA he likes the most.
He didn't find Candy Aunty.
He was a little upset.
Then suddenly he saw that all his friends are staring at him, weaving their hands at him.
He heard his mother's voice " Oh finally !
Thank God ! "
SPLASH !!!
!A splash of cold water suddenly pull him down in the bedroom.
"Maa, You know, I saw my school, Gopal Uncle's shop, but that was so tiny.
I flewed finally maa, I flewed.
"He was unaware that it was a dream after the accident he made with bed.
Tenzin and Tashi were two young Tibetan monks.
They lived in a small monastery on a beautiful green hill.
Here, it was lovely when it rained.When Tashi looked out of the window late one morning, the rain was coming down hard.
Rivulets were forming where the water had made paths on the muddy road.
Tashi couldn’t think of a better way to spend the afternoon than sailing paper boats.Tashi and Tenzin set about making many paper boats.
As soon as it stopped raining, the boys ran outside.
They sailed the paper boats they had made – some big, some small.
The boats floated nicely along the path.
The two young monks were happy.
As they trotted back home, they saw Gen Lobsang.
Genla lived in the monastery and told the children the most wonderful stories.
“Genla,” shouted Tenzin.
“Can you tell us a story about why boats float?” Gen Lobsang thought for a minute and said, “I don’t know why boats – or ships, for that matter – float.
But I am curious to find out.”Genla: A polite way of addressing the teacher in Tibetan
Genla and the children decided to go and ask Miss Sonam, the science teacher, if she knew why boats float.
Tenzin and Tashi gently pulled Gen Lobsang from his chair.
They held his hands to help him walk.
When they reached her room, Miss Sonam was reading a book.
“Tashi delek,” said Genla, Tashi and Tenzin.
“Tashi delek,” she replied.“We have a question for you,” said Genla.
Tashi delek: A common Tibetan greeting; tashi means ‘good fortune’ and delek means ‘well being’.
“Yes, can you tell us what makes boats float on water, Miss?” Tenzin asked.“I can,” said Miss Sonam.
“Or maybe we can find out together?”Before they knew it, Miss Sonam was giving instructions.
“Tenzin, please bring a plastic basin from the kitchen.”“Tashi, please fetch a small bucket of water.”“Genla, hold this apple.
Please don’t eat it.”
Miss Sonam asked Tashi to fill the tub to the brim.
“Now, Genla,” she said, “dip the apple in the tub, please.
Enough to cover it completely in water.”
Genla gently dropped the fruit into the tub and pushed it down with his little finger.
Some water spilled.
Tashi and Tenzin shrieked, “The water is overflowing!”Genla let go of the apple, and it rose up.Miss Sonam was smiling.
“What happened here?” she asked.
“Genla pushed the apple into the water,” said Tenzin.
“Water spilled,” said Tashi.
“The apple’s floating,” said Genla.“Correct answers, all of you!” said Miss Sonam.
“Now, can you tell me how much water spilled, Tenzin?
Was it about half a cup?
One cup?”
Tenzin looked at the water on the table and on the floor.
He said, “Maybe one cup.”“That sounds right,” said Miss Sonam.
Genla and Tashi nodded in agreement.
“Now, take the apple out.
Tashi, fill up the tub again.
Here, Tenzin.
Will you drop this spoon into the water?”Tenzin did.
The spoon sank to the bottom.“Too heavy,” said Genla.“Not as heavy as a ship in the sea,” said Tenzin.“Very little water spilled this time, not even a quarter of a cup!” said Tashi, a little sad.
“Again, you’re all correct,” said Miss Sonam.
Then she asked: “Do you see?
After Genla dropped the apple into the water, the apple pushed some water away before it could float.”“Is that the water that spilled?” asked Tenzin.“Yes.
So the apple could float because it pushed away more water than its own weight.
That means, the apple is lighter than the water it pushed away.”“What about the spoon then?” Genla said.“Well, the spoon also pushed some water away.
But much less.
Certainly less than its own weight.
So it sank.”
“What about large ships in the sea, on which there are many people?” asked Tenzin.
“...and many spoons that sink?” added Tashi.
“The spoons won’t make a ship sink, Tashi.
The ship is big enough to push away a lot of water.
Again, like the apple, more water than its own weight.
You don’t notice it because  in the ocean, there is so much water.
The ship is still lighter than the amount of water that it pushes away.” They were all quiet for a bit.
“I think I understand,” said Tenzin, slowly.
“Can we sail some boats now?” asked Tashi.“It’s time for my tea,” said Genla.
Miss Sonam smiled.
“Yes, enjoy yourselves!” she said, and gave the boys colour paper to make boats.
Tenzin and Tashi made more colourful boats and set them down in the water.
“I don’t see any water spilling now,” said Tashi.
“No, silly.
The water doesn’t always spill.
It just gets pushed away,” replied Tenzin.
“I think the boats just make some space for themselves in the stream,” said Genla.
They watched the blue and yellow boats, red and green boats, and white boats sailing.
Like prayer flags floating in the stream.
What is Gravity?What would happen if Tenzin dropped a football from the top of a tree?
Would it fall to the ground or rise towards the sky?
That’s right, it would fall because of a force called gravity.
Did you know that everything gets pulled towards the earth by that force?
What is Buoyancy?What would happen if Tashi dropped a football into a bucket of water?
Would gravity pull the football to the bottom of the bucket?
Yes, but in water, there is an upward force that opposes gravity.
It is called buoyancy.
As gravity tries to pull the football down, buoyancy tries to push it up.
In the case of the football, buoyancy is stronger than gravity.
So it floats.
What would happen if he drops a brick into the bucket?
Why?
What is Displacement?When you drop an object into water, it tries to make space for itself by pushing some water aside.
In other words, the object displaces water to make space for itself.
Bigger objects, like a basketball, displace more water than smaller ones, like a cricket ball.
A long time ago, a Greek scientist named Archimedes discovered that when the weight of the water displaced by an object is more than the weight of the object, it floats.
That is why apples float in water.
Can you guess why other objects sink?
What is Density?Every object around us is made of tiny particles that can’t be seen with the naked eye.
Density is how closely these particles are packed in an object.
The weight of Tashi’s small glass marble may be the same as Miss Sonam’s apple.
But why is the apple bigger?
Because there is more space between the particles in the apple.
In the marble, the particles are much closer to each other.
An apple is less dense than a marble.
Generally, dense objects sink in water.
Here’s a game you can play with your friends: Pick four or five objects.
Guess which ones will float and which will sink.
Then drop them into a bucket or tub of water to check.
Have fun!
रानू और उसकी सहेलियों को नाचना (डांस करना ) बहुत पसंद है.
आपको भी नाचने(डांस करने में )  में मजा आता है ना !
इन सबको डांस करना सिखाती है सुरभि मैडम .
सुरभि मैडम को डांस करना और सीखना बहुत पसंद है.
सुरभि मैडम की क्लास का इंतजार सभी बच्चे बेसब्री से करते है.
सुरभि मैडम बालवाटिका की मैडम है.
हर शनिवार को सुरभि मैडम सभी बच्चों की मस्ती की पाठशाला लेती है.
जिसमे सभी बच्चे खूब आनंद लेते है.
जब सुरभि मैडम ताल पर ताल मिलाकर डांस करती है तो बच्चे भी उनका अनुसरण करते है.
रानू को अभी ज्यादा दिन नहीं हुए है सुरभि मैडम की क्लास में अभी उसे अच्छे से डांस करना नहीं आता है.
पर वह बहुत मजे से सब धीरे धीरे सिख रही है.
प्रीति तो बहुत अच्छा डांस करना जानती है.
जैसा मैडम करती है ठीक  वैसा ही प्रीति भी करती है.
वार्षिक उत्सव के लिए सभी बच्चे खूब मेहनत कर रहे है.
सभी बच्चे बढ़ - चढ़ कर अपनी तैयारी कर रहे है.
स्वाति, रानू, प्रीति, पीहू, बंटी, राजेश, हरि, मीना, गरिमा सब के सब.
सभी को उस दिन का बेसब्री से इंतजार है जब वे सब अपनी डांस प्रस्तुति देंगे.
रानू को अभी ठीक से डांस के स्टेप्स समझ नहीं आते और वह गलती कर बैठती है तो कभी- कभी सभी बच्चे उसे  चिढ़ाते है.
बेचारी रानू !
सुरभि मैडम सोचती है की कैसे इसे सारे स्टेप्स याद कराऊंगी.
वो कोई तरकीब लगाती  है जिससे रानू डांस के स्टेप्स याद रख पाए.
सुरभि मैडम रानू के लिए कविता बनाती  है.
जिसमे की सारे डांस के  स्टेप्स के बारे में बताया गया होता है.
सुरभि मैडम रानू को वो कविता याद करवाती है और उनको बताती है की अगर तुम इनको अच्छे से याद कर लोगी तो तुम डांस के सारे स्टेप्स वन बाय वन  कर पाओगी.
सुरभि मैडम रानू कोउस कविता के साथ डांस करके दिखाती है.
रानू भी साथ में करती है और रानू को सारे स्टेप्स याद हो जाते है.
वो बहुत खुश होती है.
वार्षिक उत्सव में सारे बच्चे अपनी डांस कला का प्रदर्शन करते है और सभी इंजॉय (आनंद लेते है )करते है.
रानू भी अपना डांस प्रस्तुत करती है.
सब बहुत खुश होते है.
कार्यक्रम में हर बच्चा बढ़ - चढ़ कर भागीदारी निभाता है और अपनी मनमोहक नृत्य से सबका मन मोह लेता है.
कुछ अकेले डांस में हिस्सा लेते है तो कुछ बच्चे ग्रुप  में भी डांस प्रस्तुत करते है.
सबके सब आनंद में भाव विभोर हो जाते है.
जब रानू की बारी आती है तो सब आश्चर्य चकित हो जाते है रानू एक भी स्टेप्स भीना भूले पूरा डांस सही सही करती है.
खुद सुरभि मैडम भी अवाक् रहा जाती है रानू के डांस को देखकर.
वहा उपस्थित सभी लोग सभी बच्चों की भूरी - भूरी प्रसंशा करते है.
पूरा हॉल तालियों की गड़गड़ाहट से गूंज उठता है.
अपनी तारीफ सुनकर सभी बच्चे खुशी से झूम उठे.
उन सबकी मेहनत सफल हो गई थी साथ ही सुरभि मैडम की कविता का कमाल  और मेहनत  की जीत भी तो हुई थी.
डांस    चांस   मांस   , हिलना  सिलना  मिलना  खिलना  , फुला न समाना ,    गदगद हो जाना ,    अवाक् रहा जाना     आश्चर्यचकित रहा जाना ,   धीरे - धीरे,    एक के बाद एक ,
Tall like a treeShort like grass
Up in the sky is a cloudDown in the soil is an earthworm
Light like a petal Heavy like a rock
Over the leaf is a caterpillarUnder the leaf is a dragonfly
Quick as a squirrelSlow as a snail
Birds before sunriseBats after sunset
Above the tree is the moonBelow the tree is you!
Wow!
from where is this sweet smell coming?
Here flowers are giving nice smell!
Oh!
here the cow dung is giving bad smell!
From my dirty socks what dirty smell, yuck....!
Here i can smell hot hot puri and potato curry!
From this new Bengali sweet shop,  the Gulab Jamun is giving such lovely smell!
Dear children, do you know, our nose has two nostrils.
Through these we can smell and know about good and bad smell.Not only this,  we can also guess the taste of food through smell.
By smelling we can also find out if we are near or far from the smelling thing.Animals have this smelling power much more than human.
This is how mosquitoes smell our warm blood and find us.
Ants come to food as soon as it falls on the ground.
How?
By smell!Everybody knows that the dogs have strong sense of smell.
Thats why they can find out the thief or explosives.
So now friends you know that when we pass near a garden we take a deep breath and when are near dustbin we close our nose?
We do this because we have a superpower and that is of smell.
For many months, the skies were dry.
Lomongin, the famous rain-maker, talked to his gods.
People gathered outside his home, anxiously waiting for a message of hope.
When he came out, he assured people that the creator was going to give them rain soon.
They would be able to plant their crops.
Children played outside as we waited for the rains.
Later that day, we saw big white clouds in the far east.
I knew they were rain clouds.
People were still thinking about what the rain-maker said.
Mother shouted loudly, "There!
The clouds are now dark.
Come inside."
The rain poured down.
We had waited for the rains!
At first we rejoiced.
But the rains did not stop.
There was water everywhere.
The bridge linking our village to the mainland was washed away.
Houses were washed away by floods.
What was a blessing, was now a disaster for us.
Everybody had prepared for planting.
But now they could not plant.
People of my village had longed for rain but now they did not want it anymore.
We had no bridge to cross on.
Many had no homes.
And, we had another problem!
We saw crocodiles swimming everywhere.
This had never happened before.
We were confused.
We could not go shopping because all the shops were across the river.
Children couldn't go to school because schools were across the river.
What should have been a blessing, became a curse to us.
Lomongin, the rain-maker, was disappointed as well.
The only one who was happy, was Kapuus with his eight cats!
Rabbit was sleeping under an apple tree.
An apple fell down from a branch.
A voice said, "Run Rabbit run!"
She woke up quickly and ran away with great speed.
She met Chicken.
"Why are you running?"
asked Chicken.
Rabbit replied, "I don't know.
I just heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Chicken was frightened.
She started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They met Dog.
Dog asked, "Why are you running?"
Chicken said, "I don't know.
I just heard what Rabbit said, and she doesn't know.
She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Dog was surprised about what she heard.
She started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
They met Horse.
Horse asked Dog, "Why are you running?"
Dog said, "I don't know.
I just heard what Chicken said, and she doesn't know.
She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know.
She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
Horse started to run with the others.
They met Donkey.
Donkey asked, "Why are you running?"
Horse replied, "I don't know.
I just heard what Dog said, and he doesn't know.
He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know.
She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know.
She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
So Donkey starts running too.
They met Cow.
Cow asked, "Why are you running?"
Donkey replied, "I don't know.
I just heard what Horse said, and she doesn't know.
She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know.
He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know.
She heard what Rabbit  said and she doesn't know.
She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cow was worried and starte to run as well.
They met Cat.
Cat asked, "Why are you running?"
Cow replied, "I don't know.
I just heard what Donkey said, and he doesn't know.
He heard what Horse said and she doesn't know.
She heard what Dog said and he doesn't know.
He heard what Chicken said and she doesn't know.
She heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know.
She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
Cat started running with the other animals.
Then they met the boy riding the bicycle and he asked, "Why are you running?''
And the animals replied, "We don't know.
We heard what Rabbit said and she doesn't know.
She heard something falling and a voice said, 'Run rabbit run!'"
The boy laughed and said, "An apple fell off the tree because of the wind.
I'm the one who said, 'Run Rabbit run!'"
13 The Big Day Arrives The sun was shining brightly on the morning of the big day, but the ground wasstill white with snow and the air was very cold.
Outside the gates of Wonka's factory, enormous crowds of people had gatheredto watch the five lucky ticket holders going in.
The excitement was tremendous.
Itwas just before ten o'clock.
The crowds were pushing and shouting, and policemenwith arms linked were trying to hold them back from the gates.
Right beside the gates, in a small group that was carefully shielded from thecrowds by the police, stood the five famous children, together with the grown-upswho had come with them.
The tall bony figure of Grandpa Joe could be seen standing quietly among them,and beside him, holding tightly on to his hand, was little Charlie Bucket himself.
All the children, except Charlie, had both their mothers and fathers with them,and it was a good thing that they had, otherwise the whole party might have got outof hand.
They were so eager to get going that their parents were having to hold themback by force to prevent them from climbing over the gates.
'Be patient!'
cried thefathers.
'Be still!
It's not time yet!
It's not ten o'clock!'
Behind him, Charlie Bucket could hear the shouts of the people in the crowd asthey pushed and fought to get a glimpse of the famous children.
'There's Violet Beauregarde!'
he heard someone shouting.
'That's her all right!
Ican remember her face from the newspapers!'
'And you know what?'
somebody else shouted back.
'She's still chewing thatdreadful old piece of gum she's had for three months!
You look at her jaws!
They'restill working on it!'
'Who's the big fat boy?'
'That's Augustus Gloop!'
'So it is!'
'Enormous, isn't he!'
'Fantastic!'
'Who's the kid with a picture of The Lone Ranger stencilled on his windcheater?'
'That's Mike Teavee!
He's the television fiend!'
'He must be crazy!
Look at all those toy pistols he's got hanging all over him!'
'The one I want to see is Veruca Salt!'
shouted another voice in the crowd.
'She'sthe girl whose father bought up half a million chocolate bars and then made theworkers in his peanut factory unwrap every one of them until they found a GoldenTicket!
He gives her anything she wants!
Absolutely anything!
She only has to startscreaming for it and she gets it!
''Dreadful, isn't it?'
'Shocking, I call it!'
'Which do you think is her?'
'That one!
Over there on the left!
The little girl in the silver mink coat!
'Which one is Charlie Bucket?'
'Charlie Bucket?
He must be that skinny little shrimp standing beside the oldfellow who looks like a skeleton.
Very close to us.
Just there!
See him?'
Why hasn't he got a coat on in this cold weather?'
'Don't ask me.
Maybe he can't afford to buy one.'
'Goodness me!
He must be freezing!'
Charlie, standing only a few paces away from the speaker, gave Grandpa Joe'shand a squeeze, and the old man looked down at Charlie and smiled.
Somewhere in the distance, a
church clock began striking ten.
Very slowly, with a loud creaking of rusty hinges, the great iron gates of thefactory began to swing open.
The crowd became suddenly silent.
The children stopped jumping about.
Alleyes were fixed upon the gates.
'There he is!'
somebody shouted, 'That's him!'
And so it was!
Turtle Dove can fly.
Turtle Dove cannot swim.
Turtle Dove can eat food.
Turtle Dove cannot chew the food.
Turtle Dove can walk.
Turtle Dove cannot crawl.
Turtle Dove can sit on tree branch.
Turtle Dove cannot hold on to tree branch.
Byantaka had a cow and a small pot for water.
He went to borrow a bigger pot from his neighbour.
Byantaka put a small pot inside the neighbour’s big pot.
He carried the pots to the neighbour.
“Your pot gave birth,” Byantaka told the neighbour.
Byantaka went to the neighbour to borrow the pot again.
He did not return it.
The neighbour went to ask.
Byantaka said, “It died.
I was coming to tell you.”
The neighbour shouted, “I have never heard of a pot dying!”
Byantaka replied, "My friend, everything that reproduces must die."
The neighbour went to court to report Byantaka.
The judge said, “Every living thing which reproduces must die.”
Byantaka got the big pot and his neighbour lost.
I woke up by the sounds coming from the playground in the flat, I am studying in 6th standard in Vidyodaya School.
Today is a holiday because of Gandhi Jayanthi.
He had told his mother to take him to the zoo today.
She had accepted because it was a holiday for her too, So I was very excited to go to the zoo because the last time he went there was at the age of 2.
I took a camera and a hat because it will be too hot there.
The way to the zoo was through a forest that has a beautiful atmosphere ,cool and shady.
Even there was strange sounds we enjoyed the route.
It was afternoon when we reached there.
First we went to the birds side there we saw parrots which was flying around like army pilots fly the jets in different directions.
Then we saw eagles, owls which were sitting still like a statue and swans which were sleepy.
We saw black coloured cranes which was eating.
Then we saw a peacock sitting in a branch and looking everywhere, ostriches and emu where roaming around, wild hens which was pecking grains and drinking water.
Then we went to herbivorous side where we so krishna mrigam which is a rare species, dotted deer which was eating grass.
Kalamaan which was fighting with its horns each other.
Hippopotamus which was eating grass and not minding any type of noises and other things.
Then we went to the carnivorous side where the tiger and lion was sleeping after a heavy meal, leopards, wild cats and foxes were roaming in the cage.
Then in the reptile side we saw alligator which was like owls siting still and there were different types of snakes inside the glass case, ant eaters were also clenching in the rock inside the cage.
The animals in the zoo was over but we went to the museum near the zoo there we saw stuffed animals , skeletons of elephant, lion, horse, Jaws of whale etc.
We saw different types of rocks from different civilizations, different types of weapons from the age of kings in Kerala, art forms in India.
We enjoyed the trip to the zoo and the museum.
I got so many knowledge from there.
Visit a zoo nearby!
A white butterfly flew down from the white clouds.
He flew along the river.
He flew over forests and fields.
Suddenly, he saw…
...a flock of colorful butterflies.
They all wore a shirt and a hat.
They all had a bag  on their shoulders and a pen in their hands.
The white butterfly approached the colorful butterflies.
“Where are you going?” he asked.
“We are going to school," they said.
"Do you want to come with us?” “Yes, I do!” the white butterfly replied.
"But where is your shirt?"
the butterflies asked.
"Where is your cap?
""Where is your bag" "Where is your pen?”
“Oh no!"
the white butterfly said.
"I do not have a shirt or a cap.
I do not have a bag or a pen.
What can I do?”
The white butterfly decided to go to the market.
First, the white butterfly flew to a clothing shop.
He asked the blue cricket, “Do you have a red shirt?”
The blue cricket said, “Yes, I do.
Here, try on this shirt made of red flowers.” The white butterfly bought the red shirt.
Then…
Next, the white butterfly flew to a cap shop.
He asked the brown ant, “Do you have a blue cap?”
The brown ant said, “Yes!
Here you go, a cap made of blue flowers.” The white butterfly bought the blue cap.
Then…
The white butterfly went to a bag shop.
He asked the yellow bird, “Do you have a green bag?”
The yellow bird said, “Yes!
I have a bag made of green leaves.” The white butterfly bought the green bag.
Then…
The white butterfly went to a stationery shop.
He asked the green frog, “Do you have a yellow pen?”
The green frog said, “Yes, I do!
Here you go.”The white butterfly bought the yellow pen.
Then...
The white butterfly flew to  the Butterfly School in the sunflower field.He joined in with the colorful butterflies and played on the sunflowers .Everyone was ready for school!
In a beautiful Garden, lived a lady  bug, butterfly and honeybees.
Honeybee  used to play with its friends and flew back to its honeycomb taking the collected honey with it.
Suddenly, one day, Honeybee looked grim and dull.
His friends understood its illness.
It looked dreary.
"Oops !
I was not able to fly because of my illness", Honeybee worried.
Holding a bark of the tree, It went to a deep thinking.
A butterfly came across the dull honeybee.
It took the honeybee to fly along with him.
And Honeybee happily flew   ﻿along with Butterfly.
It’s hard to be still,it’s hard to be quiet.
It's hard to say no,to toes that wiggle so.
It's hard to keep downthese merry feet,
When sounds all around tap a happy beat.
Cheep, cheep, cheep call the sparrows.
Drip, drip, drip goes the tap.
SHEE... SHEEEE...
SHEE... sings the cooker.
Crunch, crunch, crunch...... uh oh, I know what that is!
“Why little one, have you wandered so far, away from your books, your toys and your cars?
Why indeed?
There’s nothing here to hear or to see.”
I look up at mamma.
I look in surprise.
Can she not see?Can she not hear?
The cheep, the drip, the sheee...
... and the crunch?
A world full of sounds, all waiting to be found?
It was holiday time.
Veena and Vinay were in the garden.
There were tins of paint everywhere.
There was white paint and red paint and green paint and blue paint and yellow paint.
The painters were busy.
One painter was on a ladder.
Another was hanging from the roof on a swing.
“Can we help?” asked Veena and Vinay.
The painter gave each of them a brush.
“Paint the inside of the gate,” he said to Veena.
“Paint the outside of the gate,” he said to Vinay.
They picked up two tins of paint and set to work.
Veena painted one side of the gate.
Vinay painted the other side of the gate.
The paint fell on the ground.
The paint fell on the wall.
The paint fell on them.
At last they finished.
They wiped off the paint that had splashed on the ground.
They wiped off the paint that had splashed on the wall.
They wiped off the paint that had splashed on them.
"I love my red gate!"
said Veena.
"I love my green gate!"
said Vinay.
“Oh, you have made a two-coloured gate!” cried the painter.
“Let us keep it that way!” said Mother.
This is my school.
It is called the balwadi.
My brother Mannu and I go to the balwadi.
It is a small school for little children like us.
We leave our shoes and slippers by the door.
Everyone puts their shoes or slippers in a line.
It looks good that way.
We leave our tiffin boxes near the wall.
Some boxes are big.
Others are small.
Water bottles are hung on the wall.
The bottles are of different colours.
Red, blue, green, yellow.
I like to count.
Mannu plays with blocks and puts different shapes together.
He likes to play with beads.
I like the cards with dots.
Our teacher says playing with these toys is good for the brain.
We read books.
Some books have pictures.
The teacher helps us to learn the letters.
She says I will read soon because I can recognize all the letters.
I can also read sentences.
She does not know it.
Now it is time for stories.
Our teacher has puppets.
The teacher uses the puppets to tell us stories.
The puppets speak in a funny voice.
My friends think that the puppets can speak.
They are surprised.
But I am not.
Puppets do not talk.
I know that it is the teacher who speaks in a funny voice for them.
It is now time to play.
The school has a tub with some play dough.
Mannu likes to make shapes out of the dough.
I like to make fruits, toys and other things.
At 4 o'clock, the school bell rings.
My mother comes to take us home.
I hug her first.
Mannu does not like that.
He complains.
I have fun at school.
But going home is more fun.
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text  My crocodile, Horrible Jatau,  has been with me since I was born.
He likes eating all the soldiers in my  body that fight germs and stop me from getting sick.
When he eats too many of  my soldiers, I get very sick.
Then I cannot go to school and play with my  friends.
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text  My Goggo, my aunts  and uncles, and friends love me, even though I have a crocodile called  Horrible Jatau living in my body.
The lazy crocodile
Once there was a lazy crocodile named Snappy.
He was the laziest crocodile in the entire jungle.
Once he sat near a pond admiring himself in the pond.
A monkey said to Snappy ‘why are you so lazy.
‘ I am not lazy I eat and sleep.’ The  monkey went away.
Stupid monkey thought Snappy.
The monkey called a meeting with all the other animals to make Snappy less lazy.
‘Why don’t we talk to him.
‘Said the tiger.
’ Great idea.’ Everyone said.
First it was the zebra’s turn but Snappy did not listen .
Same happened to the other animals.
At last it was the rabbit’s turn.
‘Not a hope ‘declared the giraffe.
‘ What will you do  ‘ said  the monkey .
The rabbit went to  Snappy and said ‘Are you not ashamed ‘ said the rabbit
‘Why shall I be’ said snappy.’ ‘As you are so lazy ‘ said the rabbit.
Snappy did feel very ashamed and from that day on he was never lazy
My school is far away from my home.
I walk alone along a busy part to school.
One day, on my way to school, I saw a dog running towards me barking wo!
wo!
I ran quickly home to my mother to report.
My mother held my hand and walked with me back to school.
I never had to walk alone to school again.
Excited
Sad
Shy
Scared
Happy
Angry
Once, there lived a box of paint tubes inan artist’s house.
The yellow tube said to her box mates, “Idon’t want to paint with you all.
I don’t want to become thin and ugly.”
That same day, the artist decided to paintthe most beautiful painting everfor all the children in the world.
The artist painted the trees with brown.
But something was missing.
What was it?
The artist painted the leaves with green.
But something was missing.
What was it?
The artist painted the sky with blue.
But something was missing.
What was it?
She painted the blooming flowers with red and pink.
Still, something was missing.
She painted the scarlet dragonflies, the lime green parrots, the snow white rabbit andthe grey elephant.
But something was STILL missing.
What do you think was missing in thepainting?
The artist opened the window and looked outside.
Now she knew what was missing.
It was the sun!
“Yellow?
Yellow!
Yellowwww!”She needed yellow to paint the sun.
Do you know where yellow was hiding?
Yellow was nowhere to be seen!
But what about the most beautiful paintingfor all the children in the world?
What could be done?
Yellow thought and thought.Then she stuck her head out of her hiding place, whispering, “Here I am.
You can paint the sunnow.
But… only take a little of me.”
There!
The artist could now paint the mostbeautiful painting ever for all the children in the world.
Do you like it?
One day, in a sleepy village with no electricity, the Electricity Department decided to put up electricity poles.
The villagers were excited.
Every day, a big pit was dug out for each pole.
The entire village would gather and watch.
Ropes were used to pull up the poles.
The villagers helped lift the poles into the pits.Even the kids pulled the ropes with all their might.
"HAYYIIISHHHHAAAAAA!"
Once the poles were up, the Electricity Department team vanished.Every day, the villagers would wait for them to come back and finish their work.
All they could talk about was how excited they were to get electricity.
The villagers began climbing up the poles.The poles gave them a perfect view of their surroundings and far away villages.Days passed, with no sign of the ElectricityDepartment team.
One evening, a little child took a lantern from her house.
She climbed up one of the poles and hung the lantern on top.
Everyone noticed the lovely bright lantern on top of the pole.
The next evening, the villagers hung lanterns from all five poles.Every day, lanterns were taken down, refueled, and hung back up again.The villagers made a game of it and had lots of fun.
Then, even without electricity, the nearby villages could spot this little village from afar at night.They began calling it‘The Village of Five Poles.’
When you want to make a call, what do you do?
Reach out for a cell phone?
Or use a landline plugged to a wall?
Perhaps the one in the post office or the phone at the grocery store, where you pay the shopkeeper to use it?
Whichever it is, the way you make the call remains the same: you enter the number and wait for it to ring.
But it wasn’t always this simple.
Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in the 1880s.
He made the first call on March 10, 1876, in his office in Boston, USA, to his assistant Thomas Watson.
Bell shouted into the mouthpiece, asking Watson to come and see him.
The assistant heard Bell through his earpiece and came running from the next room.
At that time, the telephones did not have dials - the two phones were directly connected to each other by a wire!
As more people began to get telephones, a central place called an exchange was set up.
The exchange had a switchboard connected to every telephone in the area.
An operator could plug in the wires on a switchboard to connect any two phones.
A switchboard looked like this.
And the telephones looked like this.
They had a separate mouthpieceto speak into and an earpiece to listen from.
They still didn’t havenumber dials!
How did you make calls then?
“Hello!
How may I help you?”“Operator, could you please connect me to Doctor Andrew?”“One moment.”First, you picked up the receiver.
A telephone operator would greet you.
The operator would then plug in a few wires and the doctor’s phone would start ringing.
But you had to be mindful of what you said, because the telephone operator could listen to your conversation if she wanted to.
As the number of telephones grew, it was not possible for an operator to know all the connections.
So telephones were designed to have dials.
You dialled a number instead of telling the operator to connect you.
This number would get transmitted to a switchboard that could automatically connect telephones.However, operators still routed long-distance calls.
In the late 1920s, the design of the phone changed.
What changed?The mouthpiece and the earpiece were fused into a single handset.
You could hold the handset in one hand, or cradle it between your neck and shoulder, leaving your hands free to write or wear your watch.
Soon, people wanted to make calls on the move.No, they didn’t have cell phones yet.
But you could stop on the street and call someone from public telephone booths.
By the 1930s, many major cities across the world had such booths.
In fact, this is how most people made calls.
Only very rich people had telephones at home.
Some years later, people wanted to use telephones while driving.
So phones – complete with handsets and dials – were built into cars.But these car phones had no wires!
They used radio waves to connect to other phones.
In the 1970s, a few people had phones that they could carry around in their bags.
This was the satellite phone.
It could connect to other phones using satellites.
Satphones were never popular because they needed a clear line-of-sight to a satellite in the sky.
So if you lived on the second floor of a 20-storey building, you would have to go up to the terrace to make or receive calls.
Cell phones began to be used at around the same time.
These did not need a straight connect with a satellite.
They connected to a tower nearby.
So you could make calls sitting inside your house or office.The first cell phone, made in 1973, weighed more than one kilogram!
Later, it got smaller and smaller until it could fit into your pocket.
A cell phone is convenient in other ways too.
Landline phones have to be connected with wires.
This means a lot of digging to lay cables across and between towns.
Since this also requires money, many villages did not have phones.
But the wireless cell phone has changed that.
Nearly everyone has a cell phone now.
Today’s cell phones are for more than just making calls.
You can chat, play games, send emails, browse the internet, listen to music, watch movies, click photos and record videos, download apps... What we call a smartphone is really a computer that can also make calls.What else could a phone of the future do?
Today, you can speak out your friend’s name and your phone will call her up.
Maybe one day you would be able to tell your phone, “Find me the number of my third standard math teacher,” and it would!The phone might be able to beam out three-dimensional images of objects.
So you can look at a school bag from every side before you buy it online.
On the inside too!
I also imagine these phones as bendy.
You can wrap them around your wrist or roll them up to fit a tiny purse.
And charging!
There has to be a better way to do that.
Solar cells would be great – you would only have to be out in the sun to charge it.
Or motion-based charging.
This would use kinetic energy, which means that the phone would keep getting charged as long as it was on the move.
If the battery was dying, you could take a quick run down the road.
The phone would get charged and you would get some exercise.
Smartphones become outdated very quickly!
Most people throw away their phones in one or two years to buy newer ones.
That means a lot of waste.
How nice it would be if phones were earth-friendly.
No harmful radiation, no toxic materials – all reusable or biodegradable parts.
Now, that’s really smart technology!Now, tell me, what do you think phones will be like in the future?
Inventor and TeacherAlexander Graham Bell invented the telephone.
Other scientists also worked on similar inventions.
Bell’s parents inspired him to learn about sound and speech.
His father was a professor of elocution.
Alexander’s mother was almost completely deaf, but she learnt to play the piano.
Alexander used to speak close to her forehead so that she could feel the vibrations and make out the words.
He later started a school for the deaf in Boston.
Throughout his life, Alexander kept discovering new ways to communicate.
He had 18 patents to his name.
His first invention, as a 16-year-old, was a machine to remove husk from wheat grains.
Bell was fascinated by the way sound travels through vibrations.
If you place your fingers on your throat and speak, you can feel the vibrations of your vocal chords that make the sound.
When someone speaks, the vibrations reach your ears and make the eardrum vibrate.
That’s how you hear things.
As people move farther away, the vibrations become weaker and fade out.
See the Sound!-An experimentThings you need:- 1 bowl- Plastic cling wrap- A few grains of rice- A steel plate and spoonSteps:1.
Take the bowl and stretch a plastic cling wrap tightly over it.
Make sure it doesn’t sag.2.
Sprinkle a few grains of rice on the plastic film.3.
Take the steel plate and spoon, go close to the bowl with the plastic film, but don’t touch it.4.
Start hitting the plate with the spoon.
But be careful not to touch the bowl!What do you see?
“Amma,how did you make this roti?”“Fromasmall ball of soft dough.”
“And how did you get thatdough?”“From thisfine white flour.”
“And how did you get that flour?”“Fromthis golden brown wheat.”
“And how did you get the wheat?”“We grow it in our field.”
“How do we grow the wheat?”“We sowthe seeds, water the plants and work hard.”“And then?”
“Thecrop grows and ripens.”“And then?”
“We get the wheat and Mona gets her Roti.”
“Puffed, hot and delicious.”
Mother's song was soft and sweet.
Chandu was listening to it.
Chandu fell asleep.
In his dream, he was flying.
Flying, flying into a garden.
Look!
A butterfly, so pretty.The butterfly said, “Well, hello!
How are you?”“Fine, thank you,” Chandu replied.
Chandu flew a bit higher.
Flying, flying.
He flew into a sparrow.“Hi there!
How do you do?” she asked.“Very well, thank you,” Chandu said.
Then Chandu soared still higher.
Flying, still flying, he met an eagle.“Hello friend!
How are you?” the eagle asked.“I feel good,” replied Chandu.
Chandu was flying higher and higher.
It seemed so easy.
Flying, flying.
So high that he came up to an aeroplane.“Hey, Chandu, how do you do?” the aeroplane asked.“Fine.
And safe journey!” Chandu quickly replied.
Soon Chandu climbed higher than before.
Flying and still flying.
A rocket came to meet him.
“Hello sir, how do you do?” the rocket shouted.“Very well,” Chandu smiled.
Still, Chandu was flying higher and higher.
Now the stars were twinkling all around.
They were smiling at Chandu, as though he were a part of them.“How are you feeling Chandu?” one star asked him.“I am feeling great!” he said.
Suddenly, the stars began to wobble.
And shake.
It was Mother, shaking Chandu awake.
“Good morning, how are you?”He hugged her hard and said, “Oh, now I feel better than ever before!”
I like to read.
Who can I read to?Let me check one by one.
My sister is sleeping.
Who is free?
My mother and grandmother are cooking.
Who can I read to?What my father and grandfather are doing?
They are repairing car.
Idea!I can read to myself.
There was once a jolly louse which lived in the hair of a girl.
Every day, it sipped blood from her head.The poor girl!
She scratched and scratched!
With its stomach full, the louse was happy.
One day, the louse heard about a bed bug.
This bed bug lived in the royal mattress of the King himself.
“How marvellous to live in such a grand home!” thought the louse.
The louse dreamt about the King’s head all day and all night.
“His hair must be so soft and thick, not sweaty and smelly like this little girl’s head.”
The next day, the louse decided, “I am moving to a new home!”So while the little girl was playing in the park, the louse hopped out of her head and landed on...
... the head of a little boy!
This boy’s mother was the King’s chariot driver.
As the boy kissed his mother goodnight, the clever louse leapt into the woman’s hair.
There it waited quietly, until the next day when the chariot driver set off for the palace.
The louse was careful not to give her an itch.
If she scratched, it may fall off.
The louse did not want that!
Not when it was so close to the King's royal hair.
At the palace gates, the King was waiting to go for his morning ride.
As soon as he sat down, the louse bit into the driver’s scalp.
“Ouch!” said the lady, and scratched her head.The louse flew off her hair and landed on...
... the King's freshly-bathed shoulder.
Mmmm.
He smelt good!After a breezy chariot ride, the King returned to the palace.
As he sat down to rest, thelouse looked around his room.
It was thrilled.
No dirt!
No heat!
And such a lovely smell!
But soon, the louse got hungry.The King was asleep so this was the perfect time for a royal feast!
The louse ran up the sleeping King’s neck.
It crawled higher and higher, stomach rumbling with hunger.Finally, on top of the King’s head, the louse was shocked.
The old King barely had any hair!What a terrible mistake!
One day my Brother and I were walking near the  road.
A big truck was driving down the mountain.
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Your adapted text
Once upon a time, the land at Mwese Village was very fertile.
People had no fear of pests such as monkeys and quails.
There were plenty of wild fruits and other yummy grasses for them to eat.
Mwese villagers were good farmers.
They cultivated maize, groundnuts, paddy, beans, sweet potatoes and cassava.One year, there a drought.
The crops withered.
They did not harvest as much as they did in other years.
Wild animals too suffered.
They sought food and water.
The monkeys invaded people’s farms and ate what little was there.The villagers had a difficult time keeping them off.
They threw stones and arrows, but the monkeys refused to go away.
They would simply hide nearby only to come out again when they saw there was no one around.Mzee Malele was the leader of Mwese Village.
He called a meeting and said, “My brothers and sisters, we must now guard our crops in turns.
We must do so during the day and the night.”
The villagers agreed.
The timetable was drawn.
Each had his or her turn.
Only the children, the elderly, and the sick were excused.
Whoever was on duty had to be fully armed.The monkeys knew that it was not going to be easy for them.
People were guarding everywhere to stop the monkeys from invading their farms.
The monkeys thought they were now going to die of hunger.
They called a meeting to discuss on what to do.After long discussions, they decided that one of the monkeys should chop off his tail.
The others then could him dress him like a man and send him to ask for the job of guarding the crops.The monkeys knew their monkey-in-disguise that would have to allow the other monkeys to come and eat.
So, they chose one who would undertake this task.
The one they chose was most courageous.They cut off his tail.
In two weeks’ time, the wound had healed.
They called him Mr. Maseleni.
They helped him dress up.
It was difficult to differentiate him from human beings.
Mr. Maseleni vowed that he would help his fellow monkeys.Soon, he was ready to go and ask to become a guard.
Mr. Maseleni met a group of villagers on their way to guard duty.
He introduced himself, “I am from Mapori Village.
I’m looking for a job guarding farms.”The villagers directed him to the village chief’s house.At the village, Mr. Maseleni met with the chief.
Chief Jumbe summoned a village council.
They discussed the new application.After a long discussion, it was agreed that Mr. Maseleni should be given the job.
It was also decided that he would live at the chief’s home.
Mr. Maseleni began his job immediately.
He did well at first.
When the monkeys came, he chased them away fiercely.
Now that he could eat, Mr. Maseleni was not keeping his promise!
When his fellow monkeys ran and jumped on tree branches, he beat them mercilessly.The villagers took to liking Mr. Maseleni.
They decided to raise his salary.The monkeys stopped coming to the farms.
They were afraid that Mr. Maseleni would catch them and beat them up.
They became weak with hunger.As their condition worsened, they called a meeting.At the meeting, they decided to secretly send another monkey to Mwese Village.
This monkey could reach out to Mr. Maseleni to remind him of his promise.
They also sent the message that if he did not to honour his promise, they would give him back his tail.When Mr. Maseleni got the message, he pretended not to understand.“Go, tell them, they don’t know me.
I don’t know them.
I’m not a monkey.
I’m the chief guard here.”The messenger went back to the other monkeys.
The monkeys thought that they would die of hunger.
So, they decided to find a way of sending Mr. Maseleni his tail.
On the following day, the monkeys started their journey to Mwese Village.The villagers woke up to the noise of the monkeys.
When they came out of their houses, they were greeted by dust.
Some monkeys were dancing, others were singing:Mr. MaseleniLet’s give him his tail back!Let's give him his tail back!Ti-tit-iiii!
Ti-tit-iii!Let’s give him his tail back!Let's give him his tail back!When the villagers heard the message in the song, they were surprised.
When Mr. Maseleni heard the song, he knew that his days were numbered.
The villagers headed to the village chief, where the monkeys were also heading .
Every villager came out with a weapon.They threw the arrows at the monkeys.
But Chief Jumbe stopped them and said, “Leave them.
It appears they have a message.
If they cause any trouble, then we’ll attack them.”The leader of the monkeys came forward.
He said, “We’ve come to hand back Mr. Maseleni his tail.
He is one of us.
We had turned him to look like a human being so that he would help us steal the maize.”“But, he has not honoured his promise.
Each time he sees us, he chases us away.
He beats us mercilessly,” said the leader.Chief Jumbe and all who were around were surprised.
He decided that Mr. Maseleni be brought forward.
When asked, Mr. Maseleni had no explanation.
He stared at the ground.
Then, suddenly, the monkey who was carrying the tail jumped.
He pushed the tail into Mr. Maseleni’s back and it stuck there.
Immediately the monkeys took away Mr. Maseleni.The villagers heard Mr. Maseleni crying for help.
He begged the monkeys not to turn him into a monkey again.
They dragged him to the forest.The villagers were surprised.They were happy that their maize was ready for harvesting.
They no longer feared the monkeys.
Mwese villagers no longer wanted to hire someone from outside their village.Chief Jumbe issued a directive that all visitors must be checked well.This helped to note all who were good and those who were bad.
The chief also wanted them to harvest their maize together.
From that day on, every villager took turns in guarding the crops.
The children from Mwese Village even started a game for evening time.
They sang about Mr. Maseleni.
Let’s give him his tail back!Let's give him his tail back!Ti-tit-iiii!
Ti-tit-iii!Let’s give him his tail back!Let's give him his tail back!
Then they would give someone a tail made of rope.
The monkeys went to the forest along with Mr. Maseleni.
They gave him the punishment to guard all the other monkeys.
To this day, whenever there is a group of monkeys one stays back in the trees to watch out for danger.Whenever, there is a danger coming, the guard notifies them and the other monkeys can run away.Some monkeys call this guard Mr. Maseleni.
This dress is long.
This jersey is big.
This bag is big.
This belt is.
This hat is small.
The socks are short.
But these shoes are new.
They fit well.
Today is Nandana's  mom's   birthday.
Her mom loves flowers.
Nandana is thinking deeply about what kind of flowers she can draw on the greeting card.
Do you think she will draw one  red  hibiscus?
Do you think she will draw the white jasmines?
Do you think she will draw a pink lotus?
She wanted the card to be unique unlike anything else.
After a lot of thinking she came up with a brilliant idea.
She created a beautiful and unique greeting card with flowers of  different  shapes triangles, squares and circles.Do you think her mom will like it?
In a village onthe slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa, a little girl worked in the fields with her mother.
Her name was Wangari.
Wangari lovedbeing outside.In her family’s food garden she broke up the soil with hermachete.
She pressed tiny seeds into the warm earth.
Her favouritetime of day was just after sunset.When it got too dark to see the plants, Wangari knew it was time to go home.
She would followthe narrow paths through the fields, crossing rivers as she went.
Wangari was aclever child and couldn’t wait to go to school.
But her mother and father wanted her to stay and help them at home.
When she wasseven years old, her big brother persuaded her parents to let her go to school.
She liked tolearn!
Wangari learntmore and more with every book she read.
She did so wellat school that she was invited to study in the United States of America.
Wangari wasexcited!
She wanted to know more about the world.
At the Americanuniversity Wangari learnt many new things.
She studied plants and how theygrow.
And she remembered how she grew: playing games with her brothers in theshade of the trees in the beautiful Kenyan forests.
The more shelearnt, the more she realised that she loved the people of Kenya.
She wantedthem to be happy and free.
The more shelearnt, the more she remembered her African home.
When she hadfinished her studies, she returned to Kenya.
But her country had changed.
Hugefarms stretched across the land.
Women had no woodto make cooking fires.
The people were poor and the children were hungry.
Wangari knew whatto do.
She taught the women how to plant trees from seeds.
The women soldthe trees and used the money to look after their families.
The women werevery happy.
Wangari had helped them to feel powerful and strong.
As time passed,the new trees grew into forests, and the rivers started flowing again.
Wangari’s message spread across Africa.
Today, millionsof trees have grown from Wangari’s seeds.
Wangari hadworked hard.
People all over the world took notice, and gave her a famousprize.
It is called the Nobel Peace Prize, and she was the first African womanever to receive it.
Wangari died in2011, but we can think of her every time we see a beautiful tree.
Birds have wings and most of them can fly.This has allowed them to make their homes around the world.They have learned to survive in some of the hottest places on earth,the desert,and also in the coldest,the Arctic and the Antarctic.Some birds spend nearly all their time in the air,but other birds,such as ostriches and kiwis,cannot fly at all.
Atlantic puffins are seabirds that feed on small fish.They have small wings that help them to swim as well as to fly.A male puffin fly for a long long dissents to find food.They walk really funny.They live in big holes in the rocks.A male puffin can get a lot of fishes in there mouth.
Flamingos are a type of wading bird in the family Phoenician, the only bird family in the order Phoenicians.
Four flamingo species are distributed throughout the Americas, including the Caribbean, and two species are native to Africa, Asia, and Europe.
Blue herons are maybe the most patient bird ever.And whenever he won't to move maybe the fastest.They have a long neck to chat fish.They have long legs to wade through the water.They move really really slowly and freezes to get the fish.They have greath depth perception seeing the fish in deep waters.
Peacocks are really really pretty especially the Males.The Males are Green,Yellow and Blue.And Females are Brown and sometimes they are only withe.A male peafowl, which has very long tail feathers that have eye-like markings and can be erected and fanned out in display.
Falcons are birds of prey in the genus Falcon, which includes about 40 species.
Falcons are widely distributed on all continents of the world except Antarctica, though closely related raptors did occur there in the Eocene.
Pelicans are a genus of large water birds that make up the family Pelecanidae.
They are characterized by a long beak and a large throat pouch used for catching prey and draining water from the scooped up contents before swallowing.
The osprey or more specifically the western osprey, also called sea hawk, river hawk, and the fish hawk is a diurnal, fish-eating bird of prey with a cosmopolitan range.
It is a large raptor, reaching more than 60 cm in length and 180 cm across the wings.
Woodpeckers are birds that save the tree's form getting sick,because there are few Bugs in the tree's that eat the tree's and the woodpeckers eat the bugs.Woodpeckers are part of the family Patricide, a group of near-pas-serine birds that also consist of piculets, wry necks, and sapsuckers.
ONE Banyan tree with long, hanging roots,Stands majestic and wide all over the land.
TWO Palash trees in a cool garden, Sweet nectar for bees to drink.
THREE Pipal trees on a village street,Juicy figs for parakeets to eat.
FOUR Neem trees swaying in the fields,Bitter kernels forkeeping pests away.
FIVE Jamun trees near a winding stream,Purple fruits littering the forest floor.
SIX Coral trees beside a farmland,Crimson blossoms to attract many birds.
SEVEN Deodar trees upon a tall mountain,Fragrant wood for making incense and oil.
EIGHT Tamarind trees in a small town, Tangy pods for flavouring food as we please.
NINE Sal trees in a thick forest,Leathery leaves for making serving plates.
TEN Khejri trees in a hot desert,Tender shoots for camels to eat.
Trees give oxygen for us to breathe.
They protect the soil.They make food by using the sun’s energy.
Trees give.
Trees protect.
Trees count.
Yes, they count.
Everywhere, every tree always counts!
Rinky loves her elder brother’s handwriting.
He writes with a very special shiny ink pen.
One day, when Bhaiya is not at home, Rinky looks for his pen.
She slides open his drawer.
Out go his books!Out goes a stapler!Out goes a metal ruler!
At the bottom of the drawer, Rinky finds his special pen.But what’s that?
A strange black block is stuck to it.
Rinky pulls the pen and the block apart.But then…Plink, click!
A bottle-cap jumps and sticks to the block!
Rinky giggles with delight.Can things stick to this block like magic?
Does the stapler stick to this block?Plink, click!
Yes, it sticks.
Does the furry cat stick to it?No, it does not.
Does the metal ruler stick to this block?Plink, click!
Yes, it sticks.
Does this hairy brown coconut stick to it?No, it does not.
The hairy coconut tickles Rinky’s nose.AH-CHOO!
She sneezes loudly.The pen flies out of her hand and disappears under the bed.Rinky is worried.
Bhaiya will be back soon!
She sticks her hand under the bed.Oh no!
She can’t reach the pen.
She tries to reach the pen with the ruler.Oh no!
The pen slides further away.If only there was a way to bring the pen closer to her.
Suddenly, Rinky has an idea.The best idea ever!
Rinky brings the black block near the ruler.Plink, click!
It sticks!She then holds the ruler under the bed and stretches her hand.Stretch, stretch, stretch...
Plink, click!
Guess what sticks to the block?
Quick!
