a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing. The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish. They didn't saw any fish bigger than this! Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM! They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn, and no tail.
It is fat, with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze, this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow, what would you do?
One elephant isgoing to drink water.
Two giraffes are going to drink water.
Three buffaloesand four birds are also going to drink water.
Five antelopes and warthogs are walking to the water.
Seven zebras are running to the water.
Eight frogs and nine fish are swimming in the water.
One lion roars. He also wants to drink. Who is afraid of the lion?
One elephant is drinking water with the lion.
Ben and Thabo are two hungry boys.
Granny is making ten cupcakes. She puts them on a plate.
Ben takes one cupcake. Thabo takes two cupcakes.
Ben takes four cupcakes. Thabo takes two cupcakes.
How many cupcakes did Ben eat? How many cupcakes did Thabo eat? How many cupcakes are left for granny?
Nusha was a little girl who wasn't very good at anything.
But when she was 12, she found she could fly.
She flew to school when she was late.
She flew to her grandma's house on weekends.
She flew to the market because it was quicker.
She flew across the sea to church.
She flew along the beach and saw people kissing.
She flew up to get coconuts from trees.
People paid her to help fix their roofs.
All her friends asked her how she did it.
"You have to think very, very hard," she said, "and you have to really really want to do it."
One day she met a boy who could fly too.
They started to go out together.
Maybe they got married and had children in the end.
I see a blue butterfly waving goodbye
I see a yellow bee drinking a cup of tea
I see a red fish in a dish
I see a green frog playing with a puppy dog
I see an orange duckwishing me good luck
I see a violet flowerdancing with a caterpillar
I see a grey and black catwearing an orange hat
I see a grey and brown mousehiding in a pink house
I see a red and black foxwearing purple socks
I see a green grasshopper reading ablack and white newspaper
I see a black and purple goatsailing in a red boat
I see a green and brown crocodilegiving me a big smile
I see a black and blue snakeeating a slice of cake
I see a red and yellow henwriting with a pen
I see a black and orange tigerstanding in the water
I see with my two black eyesall the colours as they fly
On a bright sunny day, a fawn was racing in a forest.
On his way he met a rabbit, he ran past the fast runner.
Next, he met an elephant and he ran past the huge animal too.
Then came a stream, he leapt and cleared the stream feeling refreshed with the fresh and cool water.
He was still full of energy, so he ran past the crumbling wall too.
He was sure that he is going to win the race and in his excitement he missed a large boulder on the grassy plain. He stumbled and fell down.
He got hurt in his leg and was bleeding. He burst into tears.
Hearing his cry a monkey came and massaged his aching leg and the tears flowed from the fawn's eyes.
Brother bear also came and picked him up but the fawn didn't stop crying
Mama dear came running to her baby and said, "Look we'll beat up this bad boulder!"
The fawn forgot his pain and stood up and said, "Oh, don't do that or he will also start crying." His mother laughed and hugged him. So did the fawn.
It is Rani's first day at school.Her mother is holding her hand and walking her to school."I am grown up now", Rani says to her mother. "Let go my hand, let go!"Her mother holds her hand even more tightly.
There were many children reaching the school already.Some children came by bus, by car, some by rickshaw, cycle.And some came by walking, just like Rani.
Rani and her mother reached the school gate, and her mother let go off her hand.Her mother stays at the gate. Now Rani has to go inside alone.There are many new faces all around her.
She takes one step, then another. She looks back, her mother was getting smaller and smaller as she walks away. She thinks. will my mother disappear and feels scared so runs back to her.She doesn't feel so grown up and holds her mother's hand and says "Don't go away".
All the students were inside by now, Rani was the only one outside.The teacher comes out and smiles at Rani. Rani smiles back at her teacher and let go off her mother's hand. Her mother says, "Rani, I will be here when you come out."Her mother waves to her and goes away.
Rani went inside. She was now happy, her mother will be there after school!
I like to read.
Who can I read to?
My sister is asleep.
Who can I read to?
My mother and grandmother are busy.
Who can I read to?
My father and grandfather are busy.
Who can I read to? I can read to myself!
What are the seven colors of the rainbow?
1. Red
He wears a red shirt.
2. Orange
What is orange in this picture?
3. Yellow
What is yellow in this picture?
3. Green
What is green in this picture?
5. Blue
What is blue in this picture?
﻿6. Indigo
What is indigo in this picture?
7. Violet
Violet is my favorite color.What is your favorite color?
Which seven colors are there in the rainbow?
He loves food, but he is too lazy to cook.
"Yes. Help me with stirring," says Rabbit. But Anansi is lazy.
Anansi ties some web around his leg and to Rabbit's pot.
"Monkeys, can I share your beans?" "Yes. Help us with chopping."
"Warthog, can I share your potatoes?" "Yes. Help me with preparing."
Soon,  each of Anansi's 8 legs is tied to a pot.
All 8 legs are being pulled! "Stop pulling!" cries Anansi.
Anansi's legs stretched! And so all spiders have long thin legs.
A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly, they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But, she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise, a dog opened the door and said, "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said, "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said, "Make the bed for  me!" Nozibele answered, "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed, or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said, "Nozibele, today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone, Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back, he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele, where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here, under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here, behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here, in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
Come Pig! Let’s play.
Can you find the carrot?
No, it’s not under there.
No, it’s not inside.
Clever Pig!
Wake up, Pig! Comeout and play.Where is she?
Pig is gone.
The sun came up.
And the sun went down.But, no Pig.
I miss my friend.
My Pig! Clever Pig.
And one, two, three new friends!
Come, pigs!
Let’s play.
Time for bed!
Goodnight, pigs.
Hi! I am Neema. Just like you, I love to eat. Here are are some things that I eat: Dhokla , Panipuri and Jalebi.
Yum Yum! Where is this noise coming from? Oh! it's Neema who is eating.
Neema loves mangoes.
She loves all fruits.
It is raining. What is Neema doing? Let us see.
Oh! Neema is eating jamuns, pineapples and corn.Yummy! She says.
Oh! it is winter.Let us see what Neema is doing.
Oh! Neema is eating custard apple , beetroot and imlis
Neema loves to eat. Just like us.
I love water.
I enjoy playingwith water.
It is raining.
Rain gives uswater.
I enjoy playingoutside.
But it israining.
I enjoy playing out in the rain.
My hair is wetfrom playing in the rain. My father is fixing my hair.
READY...                 SET...                              GO!
I run
I swim
I cycle
I skate
I fly kites
When we play, we useForce: A push or pull that helps us go fast, slow, stop and even change shape.
Friction: When one surface tries to move across another and slows things down.
I wonder ifthere's another me somewhere in the world.
Who looks thesame.
And talks thesame.
And even has mycurls.
Someone with myeyes my ears.
Who even has mylaugh.
Who can do what Ican do.
And can't do whatI can't.
I've looked andlooked everywhere to find another me. I went down to the park and looked behindthe trees.
I looked around,up and down.
At every singleface.
I couldn't find anotherme in any single place.
There's only oneme in the world! I'm special, oh it's true!
But not just me,don't you see? There's only one of you!
I like to read.
Who can I read to?Let me check one by one.
My sister is sleeping.
Who is free?
My mother and grandmother are cooking.
Who can I read to?What my father and grandfather are doing?
They are repairing car.
Idea!I can read to myself.
I dance when I am happy, I dance when I am sad, I dance when I am lonely, I dance when I am angry.
My teacher says,  "Sit still! Don't dance about all day."
But my mother says, "Dancing makes you healthy,  Dancing makes you tall, One day you'll be a dancer, And surprise them all!"
And I say, "One day I'll dance and people will pay Just to see me leap and twirl."
"Her dancing is SO good," they'll say."
Namu and her brother are ready for school.
Namu carries her brother on her bicycle.
Their friends cheer for them as they ride into school.
While they are in the classroom,  a monkey arrives outside. The monkey rides away on Namu's bicycle!
The children chase the monkey.
The monkey leaves the bicycle under a tree.
The monkey swims to an island in the middle of the lake. He climbs high into a tree.
The monkey waves goodbye! The children wave back. Namu has her bicycle again.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
I can run withit.
I can jump withit.
I can dance withit.
I can swim withit.
I can skip withit.
I can kick withit.
I can escape withit.
But I can neverfly with it.
Tortoise and Squirrel need money.
They make plates to sell at the market.
Tortoise sees a fight at the market.
Squirrel and Mole are fighting.
"Leave my friend alone!" shouts Tortoise.
Mole bites Tortoise on the nose.
His broken nose hurts.
Tortoise has a crooked nose because he rushed to fight.
"Ammachi! Ammachi! Could we makecoconut barfi today?" Sooraj asked his grandmother."PLEEEEEAASE?"
"Hee hee hee! Only if you help me make it, eh?" replied Ammachi."YAY!"
"Ready?" shouted Sooraj."Ready!" said Ammachi.
"We’ll only pick the ripe ones, okay?                             The ones that are brown all over...                                Watch out! Here they come!"                        WHOOOSH... WHUMP!
"Now to get the husk off…"                                        POTCH! CRAANKK!
Sooraj’sstomach went: "GRRRRRR!" Ammachigiggled.
"Then we  crACK                                             the shell… like THIS!"                                                                                                          KHATAK!
"And grrrrrraaaaate thefrrrrrrrruuuit!"
"Toss it into the pan with all theother ingredients…" "It smells SO good, Ammachi!"
"Then we pour it all out on to atray… Wait for it to cool, baba!"
"Now cut it into                         neat little slices…"                                            SQUEAK                                            SQUEAK
"YIPPEE! Our coconut barfi is ready to be eaten!"                                                                     "YUM YUM YUM!"
Ammachi's barfi was made using SIMPLE MACHINES!  Simplemachines make it easier to do work. There are six kinds of simple machines: 1. Inclinedplane 2. Lever 3. Wheeland Axle
Malela village was surrounded by hills. Many snakes lived in the forest on those hills. The biggest snake was called python by the villagers. Python scared many people. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, three sisters, Mutale, Mutinta and Mabvuto went to the forest to fetch firewood. The girls' grandmother warned, "Beware of Python the big snake. Do not take anything from the forest except the wood."  Only Ajoh did not pay attention to her grandmother.
The girls packed milk, bananas, sweet potatoes and water. They took ropes for tying firewood and a sharp dagga for chopping the wood. Then they left for the forest.
On the way, the sisters chatted and laughed. Suddenly,  Mutale, the eldest of them, said, "Be quiet. We are coming to where Unyalego the snake lives."
Mabvuto called to the others, "Look, here are Python's golden teeth. Let us take them."  Mutale reminded them, "Don't forget grandmother's warning. We must not take anything from the forest except firewood."
Mutinta said, "I don't trust grandmother. She said that to stop us having what we want. I want the golden teeth." Her sisters were worried, but Mutinta did not care.
At that moment Python came looking for his golden teeth. He was furious when he could not find the teeth. Then python heard the girls chatting and laughing. He hid under a rock next to the road where the girls would pass on their way back.
The sisters were going home carrying their firewood. Suddenly, they heard, "Hssssss!" There was Python with his mouth wide open, ready to bite. The girls were terrified.
Python asked the girls, "Who took my golden teeth?" No one answered. Python decided to test the girls. "Whoever is innocent,  will be able to sing well. She will go home with her wood. But the guilty one will sing badly. And I will eat her!"
Mutale started to sing with a clear voice, "It was not me,  it was not me who took the teeth. The one who took is still behind." Then Mabvuto sang the song. She also sang well.
Lastly, it was Mutinta's turn. She was scared. She started singing. It  sounded terrible and the words were wrong. Python shouted, "Can't you sing properly like the others?" Python knew that Mutinta took his golden teeth.
Python opened his huge jaws and swallowed Mutinta. Her sisters ran back to the village. They told everyone the story of what happened. "I warned her, if only she had listened," the girls' grandmother said sadly.
'Wov! What a lovely raincoat!' Mannu danced happily holding the shining red raincoat that his parents had bought for him.'Mamma, may I wear the raincoat now?' Manu asked his mother.Mamma said, 'No, my child. You can wear it when it rains. It should start raining soon. But as of now I don't see any signs of the rain.'
But, Monday was a bright sunny day, full of golden sunshine.Mannu looked out of the window every now and then and asked his mother,'Mamma, will it rain today?'Mamma  peeped out of the window and said, ' I don't think it will rain today. You cannot wear the raincoat today. People will laugh at you, if you do.'
On Tuesday also Mannu kept looking at the sky. And the raincoat was kept right next to him, ready to be used. But the sky was a nice blue and as bright as it was on Monday.Mannu was disappointed,'Mamma, when will I be able to use the raincoat?''There is just a single cloud in the sky today, and that too a white one. I don't think you will get a chance to wear the raincoat today.'Mamma said.
Wednesday again was a very hot sunny day.Mannu was getting worried, 'Mamma, why is it not raining yet?'He tried to put the raincoat on at home. But had to immediately take it off because he felt too hot in it.Mamma, in her eagerness to comfort him said, 'I think it will rain soon, probably by afternoon.'
On Thursday, there was the school picnic. Mannu was eager to show off the raincoat to his school buddies.'Mamma, shall I carry the raincoat to the picnic. What if it rains there?' Mannu asked.'Don't, my pet. It will not rain today. See those white clouds? And they are also so far away.' Mamma tried to comfort him.
And... at last  on Friday, the sky looked quite dark with black clouds. Mannu kept the raincoat ready at hand.'Mamma, it will rain today, right mamma?' Mannu asked excitedly. The peacock also seemed to think so and started dancing. The tortoise came out of it's hiding and looked up at the sky hoping perhaps to feel cooler after the hot summer.'I think so. Today the sky is full of black clouds.' Mamma smiled at Mannu's excitement and was happy for him.
On the Saturday morning there was a loud thunder.  And also lightening.'Mamma, it that not lightening? Now it will surely rain, right Mamma?' asked Manu.He ran out on the lawns and saw that a frog and a tortoise also had come out of their hiding.
And.. tip...tap...tip...tap... came down the raindrops!Mannu, loved the rains...raincoat or no raincoat.'Oh, it is raining; it is raining.' Thus shouting  Mannu ran out of the house and started  jumping and dancing in the rain. And he had the company of the frog who also seemed to be  waiting for the rains.
'Wait Mannu, wait.' Mamma ran after him with his raincoat in her hand. 'You forgot your raincoat!'But Mannu was very happy getting drenched in rains. The raincoat which he was holding close to himself all this time was all forgotten.
I wake up and make fire.
I boil some water.
I chop the firewood.
I stir the pot.
I sweep the floor.
I wash the dishes.
When my brother is busy playing!
How many legs do two ladybirds have?
How many wings dofour birds have?
How many horns do three rhinos have?
How many trunksdo five elephants have?
How many ears doseven dogs have?
How many tails do three monkeys have?
How many eyes dosix cats have?
How many legsdoes one worm have?
He jumps.
She skips.
He builds.
She dances.
He winks.
They sing.
She plays.
He reads.
It is dry.
The sun is hot.
It is windy.
It is cloudy.
It is cold.
It is raining.
There is thunder.
I see a rainbow.
Sheep lived in the city. She got tired of city life and decided to go to the bush.On her way she met Hyena who had not eaten for many days.
She greeted Hyena over and over again, "Brother Hyena, how are you? Brother Hyena, how are you?"Hyena answered Sheep, "Don't greet me over and over. Do something to end my hunger."
When Sheep heard this, she started running. Suddenly, she reached Lion's den. Hyena was running after her. Hyena arrived at the den and finally stopped, throwing dust into Lion's eyes.
Lion said to Hyena, "Can't we even find peace in our dens? You throw dust into our eyes!" Hyena answered, "King, I did not mean to disrespect you! I am only running after my food!"
Lion said, "You are food to me, too, Hyena. Did I chase you? You came to me. Don't blame me later."
Then Lion said to Sheep, "Why did you come to the bush?" Sheep replied, "I came because I am a diviner."
Lion said, "Prepare traditional medicine to prove that you are truly a diviner." Sheep replied, "My medicine is expensive." Lion said, "That is no problem, whatever it costs. There is nothing that is impossible for me."
Sheep said, "The medicine is Hyena's ear." Lion cut off Hyena's ear and gave it to Sheep. Sheep put Hyena's ear inside a jar of honey and gave it to Lion.
Lion ate Hyena's ear and found it so sweet. He asked Sheep, "Is it possible for me to have the second ear?"
Sheep said, "Yes, it is possible my king." So Lion cut off Hyena's second ear and brought it to Sheep. Sheep put the ear inside a jar of honey and gave it to Lion.
Then Lion said to Sheep, "Is it possible to get the skin?" Sheep replied, "I think it is possible my king." When Hyena heard this he was afraid of dying, and ran. Lion ran after him.
"If such is life in the bush, then it is better for me to return home," said Sheep.
I am a big boy now.
I can climb up the steps.
But I cannot climb down again.
I can climb on a chair.
But I cannot climb down again.
I climb on to the chair, and then on the table!
But I cannot climb down again.
“Papa! Papa!” I shout. Papa laughs. “Sonu, learn to climb down!” he says.
I am afraid. But I do not cry.
Slowly, I get down from the table, and down from the chair.
At last, I have learnt to climb down too!
What is it?
What is it?It hasn’t got atrunk. It’s not like me.
What is it? Ithasn’t got a tail. It’s not like me.
What is it? Ugh! Where are its feathers?It’s not like me.
What is it? Lookat those tiny feet.It’s not like us.
Do you think it’sdangerous?
Do you think it wants to eat us?
Achoo! Achoo!
Aargh!Eek!Run!
It’s chasing us!
Be careful. Comeback.
What is it?It’s a baby justlike me!
Once there was a very hungry crocodile.
He searched for food slowly and quietly.
POW! The crocodile strikes!
After that he is no longer hungry,  and he is happy.
Until he gets hungry again.
It's not easy being a tiger.Yes, tigers are beautiful and fierce.
But tigers are also big and heavy.This makes it difficult for them to hunt for food.
Out of every twenty times a tiger hunts,it eats only once.
When a tiger moves through the forest,KHAU! KHAU! KHAK!The langur calls, just like an old man coughing!KHAU! KHAU! KHAK!
AWOOOO! HAWOOOO!The barking deer calls, like a scared dog!AWOOOO! HAWOOOO!
OOW! OOW! OOW!The spotted deer calls, like a little bird!OOW! OOW! OOW!
The whole forest knows the tiger is here!AHUUUN? AHUUUN?The tiger wonders, where has everyone gone?
Ape meets Crocodile by the lake.
"Where do you live?" asks Ape,  "In the lake," says Crocodile.
"Where do you live?" asks Crocodile. "In the trees," says Ape.
"Can you swim?" asks Crocodile.
"I cannot swim," says Ape. "I can teach you."
"We are friends. Do not be afraid," says Crocodile.
"Ape,  my uncle is sick. He needs meat," says Crocodile.
Ape is very afraid. Will Crocodile eat her?
Ape wants to escape from Crocodile.
Ape has an idea.
"I will give you my heart for him," Ape promises.
"My heart is in a tree on the land," says Ape.
"Will you fetch your heart?" asks Crocodile. "Yes," says Ape.
Crocodile swims back to the land. Ape runs to the trees.
"You are not my friend. You lied!" says Crocodile.
"We are not friends. You want to eat me!" says Ape.
It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.
Little Ant had no water for many days.
“I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf,” cried Little Ant.
But even the dew had dried up.
“If I do not have water, I will die,” cried Little Ant. “I must go to the river I heard about.”
“The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away,” warned a wise squirrel.
But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. “I will die if I don't drink some water.” So, he went to look for the river.
He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.
He walked until he heard water splashing. It was the river! He could hear waves.
Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.
He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.
Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. But he was swept away by the water.
“Help me someone. Help me please!” he called.
“Quick, climb on,” said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.
“I will stay here until I can thank the dove,” decided Little Ant. “I will wait until she comes back to drink.”
One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. They had their slingshots.
“There is a big white dove that comes here to drink,” said one boy. “We will have it for supper tonight.”
“I cannot let the boys kill White Dove,” thought Little Ant. “But I am so tiny, what can I do?”
Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.
Little Ant had an idea.
He jumped onto one boy's foot. Little Ant bit that boy as hard as he could.
The boy jumped. “Ouch!” he shouted.
White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.
That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.
Cat.                                                        Cat.
Big cat.                                                     Little cat.
Cats with spots.
Two cats are up.One cat is down.
These cats are cold.
These cats are hot.
Two cats with tall ears.
Two cats with short legs.
Mad cat.                                           Sad cat.
Funny cats.
Fast cats!
Shanti and Arun were good friends. They had so much fun together.They shared secrets in class. They ran races on the way home.She was always cheerful.
One day, Shanti came into the classroom slowly. Her head was bent. She looked sad. “Did someone scold you?” asked Arun.Shanti shook her head. She sat down and did not look up. She did not answer ‘Present!’ when Sona Miss called her name. Sona Miss called again, louder this time, “Shanti Kumar!” Shanti raised her hand.
“Do you have a sore throat?” her teacher asked her. Shanti shook her head.Her cheeks were red and it looked like she had a fever.“Are you feeling okay?” Sona Miss asked.Shanti nodded, still not daring to look up.
“Why does Shanti look so sad?”“Is your little brother okay?”“Is your puppy okay?”“Is your grandmother okay?”Shanti kept nodding her head to each of her friends. But she did not look up.
Arun wanted to make her smile. He had an idea! He took out something from his bag.As he ran to show it to Shanti, it slipped out of his hands. Shanti saw something flying towards her and she grabbed it.
It was a BIG, green, rubber frog!Shanti's eyes flew open. Then she opened her mouth to laugh.THEN Arun and her friends saw why she had not smiled or talked all day!Four of her front teeth had gone missing!
Monkey and Hyena had an argument. They went to a judge.
The judge thought, "Monkey will eat my maize.Hyena will eat my cattle!"
The judge told Monkey and Hyena to ask thevillage elders.
The elders also feared to pass judgement onMonkey or Hyena.
The elders told Monkey and Hyena, "The case isvery difficult."
They told Monkey and Hyena to ask the poor woman in the village.
The poor woman agreed to judge their case.
She said to Hyena, "You are big and respected. You are a hero."
Hyena said, "You are right. I will end this disagreement."
"Monkey, you are too clever to quarrel," she said.He agreed!
She said, "You both agreed to stop quarrelling.Forgive each other."
The poor woman solved the problem.
Ammu did not have a puppy.But she told everyone in school that she did.
"My puppy’s name is Simba," she told Venu."Simba eats bananas," she told Abdul."Simba is black," she told Kumari."Simba plays ball with me," she told Unni.
So Venu, Abdul, Kumari, and Unni told Ammu that they would come home.To see Simba. Ammu shook her head."You can’t," she said.
"Why?" they asked."Because Simba is scared of crowds," said Ammu."Then we’ll play with him one by one," said Kumari.
"You can’t," Ammu said."Why?" asked Unni."Because we’re going out today," said Ammu.
"Then we’ll come tomorrow," said Abdul."We’ll bring bananas for him," said Venu."We’ll play with him one by one," said Kumari."Okay," said Ammu.  She didn’t know what else to say.
That evening, Ammu asked Achan if he would buy a puppy for her."We’ll see," said Achan."But it’s urgent," said Ammu. Achan laughed. Ammu didn’t eat dinner. She felt sick.
She didn’t want to think about tomorrow.  In the morning, Amma said, "You look ill."She touched Ammu’s forehead. A fever!
"Stay at home today," Amma said.So Ammu skipped school.She lay in bed all day. She didn’t smile at all.All she ate was a slice of bread.
In the evening, Venu, Abdul, Kumari, and Unni came home."Why didn’t you come to school today?" asked Unni."I am sick," said Ammu.
"We saw Simba," said Abdul."Where?" asked Ammu."In the garden," said Kumari.
"He didn’t want to play ball," said Abdul.Suddenly, Ammu got up from bed. She ran outside.
It was true. There was a puppy in her garden. Simba!"But he’s not black," said Venu. "He’s brown.’""Oh," said Ammu. "I made that up!"
"He’s not afraid of crowds," said Abdul."Oh," said Ammu. "I made that up!"
"He doesn’t like playing ball," said Unni."Oh," said Ammu. "I made that up!"
"But he loves bananas," said Kumari."I told you, didn’t I?" smiled Ammu happily.
a warm morning , Raja woke up with a yawn and said to himself "lets go for fishing now".
While going to the pond,he met Ram,his best friend and invited him to go to the pond together.
Sita saw them going for fishing. The boys asked her if she wanted to come with them.
Sita thought for a moment and said "don't do this,fishes will die when separated by water"
They didn't paid attention to her and continued on their way to the pond.
Raja and Ram sat near the pond and saw to fishes jumping in water,one was a thin and second a fat one.
There came a third fish. They didn't saw any fish bigger than this! Sita said" This fish is even bigger than my father's foot!"
Raja and Ram took their fishing rods with and struggled for the fish.Ram said"its mine!"Raja said"no,its mine!"
Raja pulled the rod, Ram pulled stronger.
BOOM! They fell down as their rods broke.
Do you know why ?Any guesses ?fished tied their strings together!
Long time ago,  there were four little friends namely: Joel, Jonah, Job and Jacob.
They were studying at Busolwe primary school.
The boys used to go to school with out taking tea.
They used to feel sleepy at school all the because of hunger.
One day,  they decided to go to to a nearby trading center called gampe and look for something to eat.
After crossing to a nearby trading center,  they saw a bigger banana bunch in a box at the veranda.
The boys whispered at each other hahahaaaaa. We have been very hungry but,  said Jonah.
All ran to the veranda. Picked up some bananas from the box,  smiled and started eating. Do you now what they forgot to do?
While eating,  the owner of the bananas came walking in bigger strides. ''Who has given you my bananas?'' asked the man.
As soon as they heard that voice,  the boys ran as fast as they could and hid somewhere. They said to each other that no laughing,  no coughing and no talking.
The owner of the bananas made an alarm,  ''wulululululua,  here are the thieves.
The boys were arrested,  taken to school,  called their parents,  the teachers,  and the school children to gather.
The boys were given a punishment. Each got some ten strokes and repented not to steal anything again.
There was a man who didn't want to live close to his neighbours. And he also didn't want his wife to visit the homes of her neighbours.
One day he went and built a home way out in the bush,  far from the homes of his neighbours.
He would go out every day in the morning and come home late at night.
One night the man was very late getting home. A hyena saw what that man was doing.
The hyena went and knocked on the door of the house.
The woman,  thinking it was her husband,  opened the door. The hyena jumped on her and devoured her.
The man,  when he returned home saw that his wife had been eaten by a hyena. There was nothing he could say.
All this happened because he didn't want to live near his neighbours.
Priya hears a sound.Srrr... Srrr...  Who is it?
Priya runs out. Shesees the cow chewing grass.No, it is not the cow that is making the sound.
Is it the monkey in the tree?No, it is not the monkey.
Is it the frog hopping in thegrass?No, it is not the frog.
Is it the deer jumping along?No, it is not the deer.
Is it the fish in the pond?No, it is not the fish.
Then Priya sees the elephant!The elephant is rubbing its back against a tree.
Now Priya has her answer! Srrr... Srrr...
Mother duckling, oh yes, mother duckling, oh yes
Quack, quack, because you are happyQuack, quack because you are sad
Swim, swim into the waterSwim, swim into the water
Dance, dance because you are prettyDance, dance because you are pretty
Jump, jump up in the airJump jump up so high
Sit, sit on the water.Sit, sit on the water!
Mother duckling, oh yes,Mother duckling, oh yes
Look at the animals.
The cow says, "Moo."
The goat says, "Meh,  meh."
The horse says, "Neigh."
The pig says, "Grunt."
The chicken says, "Cluck."
The dog says, "Woof."
The farmer says, "Shhh!"
Dad loves porridge.
I love cornflakes.
Dad loves coffee.
I love milk.
Dad loves apples.
I love oranges.
Dad loves bread. I love toasted bread.
We both love fat cakes (vetkoek).
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
When I talk to her, she also talks to me.
In the morning, my friend will go back into the mirror.
But I don't mind at all. We will play again in my dreams!
Roti is a circle.
Bread pakoda is a triangle.
Barfi is a square.
Chakli is a spiral.
Vada is a ring.
Patishapta is a cylinder.Patishapta is a Bengali sweet dish made of refined flour, coconut and jaggery.
Pomfret is a hexagon,when cut from the middle.
Dosa is a cone, when folded from the end.
Halwa has no shape. It takes the shape you give it.
They all come together and become a food monster.
I chase the food monster aroundthe plate.And eat it with a chomp, a crunch, a crackle and a smack!
Last week I received a lot of letters.
On Monday my doctor wrote a letter to my teacher.
Thabisile is sick. She must stay at home.
On Tuesday I got a letter from my class.
Get well soon Thabisile!
On Wednesday I got a letter from my best friend.
I drew this picture for you. Love from Dudu.
On Thursday I got a letter from my mother.
The cloud was floating
peacock said, "you start raining. and I shall dance"
The fish said, "You start raining. I need more water."
The farmer said, "You start raining. I will sow the seeds."
Raju said, "You start raining. I will sail my boat."
The cloud started raining.
The peacock danced a lot.
The pond got filled. The fish became happy.
The farmer started sowing the seeds.
splash! splash!splash! Raju somersaulted with his friends.
The cloud moved ahead happily, leaving behindthe fragrance of soil.
There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."
But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!
Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."
Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"
Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."
"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."
Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."
So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.
The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."
The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dusty car.
Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." "My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.
From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. And he tried his best not to get angry with her.Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided it wasn't worth the price to get angry and break things.
Nothing goes to waste in a forest. Nothing at all!Everything gets cleaned up. Absolutely everything!
When leopards don’t finish their food,Who eats the rest?The vultures and the hyenas!
And the hungry wild boar.GRUNT! GRUNT!
When the vultures and the hyenas waste their food,Who gobbles it up?The flies and the maggots!
And the hungry wild boar.GRUNT! GRUNT!
When elephants poop in the forest,Who snacks on that?The dung beetles!
And the hungry wild boar.GRUNT! GRUNT!
When branches, leaves, and rain fall on the ground,Who feasts on it all?The termites and the fungi!
And the hungry wild boar.GRUNT! GRUNT!
When the air gets dirty with smoke,Who sucks it all in?The trees!
Ummm, but not the hungry wild boar.GRUNT! GRUNT!
Cow, Goat, and Dog went to town in a taxi. They were going shopping.
Cow bought a TV.
Goat bought a blanket.
Dog wanted to buy new shoes. But he did not have enough money.
The three friends went home in a taxi.
Did you see Cow standing in a field doing nothing? It is because she is thinking about her TV.
Did you see Goat running away from cars? It is because he is worried that someone might steal his blanket.
Did you see Dog running towards cars? Now he has enough money to buy his shoes. He wants to go to town.
Bear likes colours.
Now, her ears are yellow.
Now, her tummy is brown.
Now, her mouth is red.
Now, her hands are blue.
Now, her back is green.
Now, her legs are pink.
Now, Bear is colourful!
Oh no! Where did all her colours go?
Amara was nine years old. She went to Kerema primary school. Her favorite subjects were English, Science and Social Studies. She wanted to be a lawyer when she grew up. Amara loved animals very much.
Amara lived with her mother, Margy. She was a very hardworking farmer. Amara's father died when she was 5 years old.
When Amara was not at school, she spent her time with Mbisa, the goat. She cleaned and fed it.
Amara also had her pet, Simba. Her mother did not like  dogs very much, but she let Amara keep Simba. Whenever Simba disturbed her, she would shout, "Go away before I kick you out." Amara felt sad.
One Saturday, they had visitors from the women's group. Amara was happy that her mother's friends had come with their children. They could play football.
Her mother had prepared the food that the group liked. Amara was reminded by her mother to keep Simba locked up. It barked at strangers.
Amara did not hear her mother calling because they were busy playing.
When Amara went to the house, she called Simba out. Simba was very obedient to Amara. After the meal, the visitors said, "We'll also treat our dogs well like Amara. We mistreat them and yet they are so helpful."
Afterwards, Amara's mother apologised for being mean and cruel to  Simba. Amara was happy that her mother accepted her dog at last. When Amara is in school her mother feeds Simba. Her mother's friends have learned to be good to their dogs.
One day, mother was cooking. She called, "Abena, Ajua, Akwasi, Aku, food is ready!  Bring your plates!"  Mother gave each of them some fufu. She gave them some soup. Then she gave them some meat. She said to them, "Go and sit down and eat."
Aku looked at her fufu. She looked at her soup. Then she looked at her meat. She put her plate down angrily and cried. Mother asked, "Aku, what is wrong with you?""My meat is the smallest," Aku cried. "But you are the youngest," mother said.
Aku cried harder. She threw herself on the ground. Mother did not want Aku to cry. She called loudly, "Abena, Ajua, Akwasi, bring your food quickly!"The children brought their food. "Now Aku, pick the meat you like," mother said.
Aku smiled happily. She looked hard at Akwasi's meat and thought, "Akwasi's meat is big." She looked hard at Ajua's meat, and thought, "Ajua's meat is bigger." She looked hard at Abena's meat. Abena's meat was the biggest. She said to mother, "I want Abena's meat."
"Abena, give your meat to Aku and take hers," mother said. Abena was unhappy.  But she did not want to disobey mother. So she gave her meat to Aku. "Mmmm, this meat will be sweet," Aku said. She sat on a stool and ate happily.
Pii! Pii! It was the ice cream man outside. He rode a big bicycle with a small horn. Aku loved ice cream. "Abena, get my bag," mother said. "I want to buy ice cream for all of you." Abena brought mother's bag.
"Four ice creams, please," mother said to the ice cream man. She paid and gave each child an ice cream. "One, two, three, four," counted Aku. She looked at her ice cream. It was small. She looked hard at Akwasi's ice cream.  It was smaller than hers.
She looked harder at Ajua's ice cream. It was the smallest of all. She was happy. "My ice cream is the biggest," she thought. "Wait," she thought. "I must see Abena's ice cream too." She moved closer to Abena. Then she opened her mouth wide and cried.
"What is the matter, Aku?" mother asked.  "Abena's ice cream is bigger than mine," she cried. Mother said, "Aku you are a greedy girl!" Aku cried harder.  She threw herself on the ground. Mother was unhappy. She did not want Aku to cry.
Mother said to Abena, "Please give your ice cream to Aku and take hers." Abena was unhappy, but she did not want to disobey mother. She gave the ice cream to Aku. Aku's eyes shone with happiness. She looked at the big ice cream and smiled.
"Mmmm, this ice cream looks good," said Aku. She opened her mouth wide and took a big bite. "Ajiish!" she shouted suddenly and spat out the ice cream."What is the matter now?" mother asked. "This ice cream is bitter," wailed Aku.
Mother took Aku's ice cream and bit into it. She frowned. "There is something wrong with this. It is spoilt," she said. Then mother added, "Sorry Aku, you cannot have another one. Now do you see that it is bad to be greedy?"
Mother is on a holiday today. She was sitting and reading a book. Even Anil was on a holiday. He wanted to do something or the other. "Mama, what is there in the blue trunk? I want to see!" Said Anil."Anil, let's see later" replied the mother.
Anil brought a stool and kept in on the chair and climbed to bring down the blue trunk."No, no! no! Anil, whatever more trunks are on top of that will all fall on our heads!"  Said the mother.
Anil became very angry. He was angry on his mother too.
" Let's go to the market and let's buy you something," said the mother.
Even after going to the market Anil was very angry. "I want that" he kept showing his finger while looking at the orange."No, no! Not that! All the fruits will fall down!" Said the fruit vendor.
"I want that book" said Anil."No, no! Not that! Take this." Said the shopkeeper.
"I want that!" Anil said it in the interest of taking one samosa. "No, no! Not that! All my samosa's will fall down!" Said the sweet vendor.
"I want that!" said Anil. "No, no! Not that! Don't even touch it! The flowers will dry up." Said the flower vendor.
Now Anil started to cry loudly.Everyone was looking at Anil.
"I want that!  It is black!", Said the mother.Anil suddenly stopped to cry.Mother, no, no! Not that!" Said Anil.
Let's take the colour of the mud.!" Said Anil. Anil slowly picked up a mud color puppy."Mother, I am very angry on you! All the puppies would have fallen down!"Mother laughed. Even Anil was laughing. Now then he wasn't angry at all.
One day, Ngô-Iwa, the dog found eggs at the river.
Ngô-Iwa stole the ten eggs and put them in her bag.
Ngô-Iwa kept the eggs warm. She wanted them to hatch.
Crocodile asked Ngô-Iwa, "Have you seen my eggs?"
When Ngô-Iwa denied, Crocodile asked all animals about her eggs.
Meanwhile,  the eggs hatched one by one when Ngô-Iwa went hunting.
Ngô-Iwa could not give the young crocodiles enough food.
One day, Crocodile heard the young crocodiles crying for food!
Crocodile entered the hut and hit Ngô-Iwa with her tail.
Ngô-Iwa ran out through the window. Crocodile chased her.
Ngô-Iwa stopped and begged, "I am sorry!"
Crocodile forgave her and took her children to the river.
Today is  Vasant Panchami. My parents say it is the first day of spring. Spring is the season between winter and summer. It is called Vasant Ritu in Sanskrit.
In many parts of India, people pray to the goddess of learning, music and art on this day. Many birds are sitting on the tree near my house. I think they are singing to me.
The leaves on the tree are new and shiny. Just like my new frock. Amma is also wearing a yellow sari ― such a pretty colour ‘basanti’, and such a pretty name!
Grandpa wants me to plant a tree. “But why?” I ask. “So that you will have a friend to grow up with, Meenu,” he says. “Spring is a good season to start something new.”
We go to the garden. Grandpa and I dig a hole in the ground and plant a sapling. “How tall will it grow?” I ask him.
"Wait and watch, dear Meenu!" he says. The squirrels are chasing each other. Tingu, the cat, chases a squirrel. And I want to chase Tingu.
The garden is full of flowers.I like the yellow roses the best and Grandpa likes the white jasmine.There is a carpet of leaves under some trees.
Many trees have flowers. I like spring! Everything looks so pretty in spring!
Tomorrow is Holi. School is closed for two days. We have made a huge Holika with twigs, and pieces of wood. Some of us went to the forest and brought tesu flowers. Manu put the flowers in a tank of water. The water has turned a bright orange!
Tomorrow we will play Holi with the orange water. We will get gujia and puris to eat. Spring is such a happy season. It is not cold, it is not hot, and it is not wet. I  can play all the time!
“I can’t lift you up, Shanu!” says Ammi. “You are too big!”
“You can’t walk to school alone, Shanu!” says Abbu. “You are too small!”
“You can’t sleep in the baby’s cot, Shanu!” says Dadu. “You are too big!”
“You can’t carry the baby to the park, Shanu!” says Dadi. “You are too small!”
Shanu is puzzled. Too big! Too small! How can she be too big andtoo small all at once?
Too big to wear her old pink frock.Too small to make dosas at the stove.
Too big to climb up on Dadu’s back?Too smallto carry the baby on hers?
“What am I the right size for?” Shanu wonders.
“You are just big enough to take me for my morning walks,” says Dadu.
“And you are just small enough for me to tell stories to,” says Dadi.
“And you will always, always be the perfect size...for this!" all say, and give her a warm, wonderful hug.
Long, long ago, the Sky God, Nyame, kept all stories locked in a wooden box, high in the sky. People down on earth had no stories to tell and they were very sad. They asked Anansi the clever Spider to help them.
Anansi spun a long thread, and climbed up his sticky thread all the way to heaven. “Can I have the stories, please?” he asked the Sky God. But Nyame laughed at Anansi and said, “Oh, these are very expensive stories. You wouldn't be able to pay for them, little spider.”
“How much do the stories cost?” asked Anansi. “You'll have to bring me three rare and fierce animals,” Nyame answered, “A leopard with sharp teeth like spears, a hornet that stings people, and a snake that swallows people whole.” He laughed and laughed. He thought his stories were quite safe.
So Anansi climbed slowly back down his sticky thread to the earth. He thought and he thought, and he came up with a plan. He dug a deep hole, covered it with branches and dirt so it was hidden, and he went home for supper. In the morning, sure enough, a leopard had fallen into his pit. He was furiously scratching at the side of the pit, but he couldn't get out.
“Oh let me help you, my dear friend!” said Anansi. “Just lie down on these sticks and I'll pull you out.” Anansi wound his sticky web round the leopard and the sticks, and pulled him up to heaven to show the Sky God. But Nyame just laughed and said, “Where are the other two?”
So Anansi went back down to earth to get the second creature. He thought and he thought and he came up with a plan. He took a gourd full of water and went to the tree where the hornets lived. He poured out some of the water all over their nest. Then he cut a leaf from a banana tree and held it over his head, and he poured the rest of the water all over himself.
He called out to the hornets, “Hey hornets! Come see! It is raining! Quick ­get inside my gourd and it will keep all of you dry.” Hornets don't like to get wet, so they all flew into Anansi's gourd.
Then Anansi quickly spun a web across the opening so the hornets couldn't get out no matter how much they buzzed. He carried them up to heaven and showed them to the Sky God. But Nyame just said, “Where's the last one?” (He wasn't laughing so much anymore.).
So Anansi went down to earth again. He thought and thought and he thought, but he couldn't come up with a plan. So he asked his wife, who had a very good idea. Together they found a good long thick branch and some strong vines. When they got near the stream where the snake lived, they began to argue. “The branch is longer!” “No, it isn't!” “Yes it is!”
Soon the snake came out and asked what the argument was. “I was arguing with my wife,” said Anansi. “She says this stick is longer than you are. But I don't agree.” “Of course I'm longer than that stick!” said the snake. “I'm very long! I'm a huge snake! Just put your stick next to me and measure!”
So Anansi did that, and he tied the snake to the stick with his vine to keep him straight. When he was all tied up, Anansi took the snake up to heaven.
Nyame had to admit that Anansi had paid his price. So he went to his wooden box, opened the lid, and gave all the stories to Anansi. Anansi carried the stories triumphantly down to earth. He shared them with his wife, and with all the other animals and people. Stories are for telling, not for keeping in wooden boxes.
"Mom," calls Lebo. "Come and look. These clothes are all too small for me!" "Let me see," says Mom.
"Look at my skirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes,  it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your skirt."
"Look at my jeans. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jeans."
"Look at my T-shirt. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your T-shirt."
"Look at my jersey. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your jersey."
"Look at my raincoat. It's too small," says Lebo. "Yes, it is," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your raincoat."
"Look at my socks. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your socks."
"Look at my shoes. They're too small," says Lebo. "Yes, they are," says Mom. "Nomsa can have your shoes."
"Now you have lots of clothes," says Lebo. "Oh no I don't," says Nomsa. "These clothes are all too big for me!"
Once upon a time, there was a hungry jackal. He was walking around the bush looking for food.
He came across a grapevine. He spotted a bunch of juicy ripe grapes hanging from a high branch.
"Those look really delicious," he thought. He took a few steps back so that he could make his highest jump.
The grapes were too high. Jackal fell on his back without even touching the bunch.
Jackal got up and went further back from his starting spot. He ran, and almost got high enough. But he fell even harder.
He tried again and again. But he couldn't get to the grapes. He kept falling until his back was very sore.
Finally, he gave up and walked away.
He stopped and looked back at the grapes. He was hungrier than ever. "Those grapes look really sour anyway," he thought.
Dog
Duck
Cow
Donkey
Mouse
Cat
Sheep
Goat
Pig
Chicken
There was a spider called Anansi. Anansi was too lazy to cook his own food. Instead, he used to visit his friends and eat the delicious food they had cooked.
One day, Anansi was passing Rabbit's house when he smelled green vegetables cooking. He was very excited. Rabbit said to Anansi, “They're not quite ready yet. You can help me to wash up while we wait.” Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. I'll come back later.”
“How will I call you when they're ready?” asked Rabbit. Anansi thought for a minute. “I'll spin a web,” he said. “I'll tie one end around my leg and one end to your pot. When the greens are ready, pull on the web string. I'll come right away.” So Anansi tied the web to the pot, and walked on.
Anansi saw Monkey and his wife, cooking beans in a large pot. “Come and join us! The beans are nearly ready.” Monkey said. Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the beans are ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
As Anansi walked by Warthog's house, he smelled sweet potatoes. Warthog told Anansi, “My pot is full of sweet potatoes and honey! Come and share my food with me. Take this fork and help me to stir it.” Anansi replied, “I'll come back later. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the sweet potatoes areready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
By the time Anansi arrived at the river, each of his eight legs was tied to a pot of delicious food. Then, Anansi felt a pull on one of his legs. “Rabbit's food is ready!” Anansi thought, licking his lips.
He felt a second pull. And a third. And a fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth pull. Everyone was pulling on the web strings at the same time! “Stop! Stop!” he cried in pain, as his legs were stretched thinner and thinner. But no one could hear him.
Finally, the web strings could hold no longer. They snapped, one by one. Anansi rolled into the river to soothe his painful legs. But his legs would not return to their normal shape. Anansi was too embarrassed to go to any of his friends that day.
Today, I am an astronaut.
Look how high I jump on the surface of the moon.
Today I am a sculptor.
Be ready, my crocodile and dinosaur are already hungry.Rawrr!
Today, I am a player of cricket.*Cricket is a known game in India that uses a bat and a ball. It is played between two groups with eleven players each.
It's my turn. And.. you're out!
Today, I am a botanist.
I discovered a new plant. I will name it after me.
Today, I am a drummer.
Dhushh! Tsshh! With the speed of the tapping of my hands, you won't be able to see it.
There are so many things I really want to be.What about tomorrow?
One day an elephant was going to drink water.
There were two giraffes who were also going to drink water.
There were three Buffaloes and four birds. They were all going to drink water.
Five impalas and six warthogs were also going to drink water.
Seven frogs and eight fishes were in the water.
Nine Zebras were going to drink water.
One lion was going to drink water.
Off all the animals, who is the toughest of them all and will be the first one to drink water?
Goat, Dog and Cow were great friends.One day they went on a journey in a taxi.
They reached the end of their journey.The driver asked them to pay their fares.Cow paid her fare.
Dog paid extra, because he did not have the correct money.
The driver was about to give Dog his change.Suddenly Goat ran away without paying.
The driver was very annoyed.He drove away without giving Dog his change.
That is why, even today, Dog runs towards a car to peep inside.He is looking for the driver who owes him change.
Goat runs away from the sound of a car.She is afraid she will be arrested for not paying her fare.
Cow is not bothered by cars.Cow takes her time crossing the road.She knows she paid her fare in full.
Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.
But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.
One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. She had a question for every animal.
She was curious about Giraffe. “Why do you have a long neck?” she asked.
She was curious about Rhino. “Why does your horn have a sharp point?”
She was curious about Hippo. “Why do you have red eyes?” she asked.
And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. “What does Crocodile eat for dinner?” she asked.
﻿“Never ask a question like that!” said her mother. Then she walked off, frowning.
Quickly Crow flew down to baby elephant.“Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner,” squawked Crow.
So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.
She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?
“Hello,” said a stone near the river bank.“Hello,” said Baby Elephant. “Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?” she asked.
“Bend down and I will tell you,” said the stone. “Lower, lower,” said the stone. So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.
Then suddenly, “Snap!” Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws.“Crocodile will eat you for dinner!” squawked Crow, and flew away.
Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.
Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. Then, “Thud!” she fell on her back.
Crocodile sunk back into the water. He was cross about losing his dinner.
Baby Elephant looked at her nose. It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!
Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.
Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.
It’s Monday morning and Thabo’s family is getting ready for the day.
Mama is in a hurry. She sloshes her tea across the counter.
But where is Thabo?
Slow down, Mama.
Baba is in a hurry. His clothes are all wrong.
But where is Thabo?
Slow down, Baba.
Zinzi is in a hurry. She gobbles up her cereal.
Has anyone seen Thabo?
Slow down Zinzi.
Thabo! Where is Thabo?
Thabo is not in a hurry.
Hurry up, Thabo! You will be late forschool andremember, it’ssoccer practicetoday.
Thabo is in a hurry.
Hurry up, everyone.It’s soccer practicetoday.
How many legs do two ladybirds have?
How many wings do four birds have?
How many horns do three rhinos have?
How many trunks do five elephants have?
How many ears do seven dogs have?
How many tails do three monkeys have?
How many eyes do six cats have?
How many legs does one worm have?
Elephant is thirsty.He is happy to have the whole pond to himself.
Two giraffes are thirsty too.Will they fight over the water?
Three buffaloes want to drink water.Will they let the four birds also drink some water?
Five antelopes need some water.Can five antelopes and six warthogs drink water from the same source?
Will the seven zebras be let to drink water as well?Let's wait and see.
Frogs and fish swim in the same water.Humans can swim alongside frogs and fish.They can all drink water from the same source.
The lion roars when he arrives at the river.Can the lion, the elephant, buffaloes, the giraffe, warthogs, antelopes and birds all drink water together?
The elephant and the lion can drink water from the same river.Where does your water come from?Who do you share the water with?
My name is Shyam, I am ten years old. i'm a little skinny, but very bold!Waking up for school is no fun at allso sleepy as I get up, I think i might fall!
My eyes close as I begin to brush,I hear mom making dosas in a rush.My mind slowly wanders away,and many, many ideas come into play.
What is my neck was ten times as long?half in school, half at home, where would I belong?
What if my legs were as tall as trees?My school building would only come up to my knees!
What if my arms were strong enough ?Then, lifting Mumma would not be tough!
What if there was nothing too hard for my teeth ?Just think of all the things I could eat!
What if my belly were as round as could be ?All my friends could jump and bounce off me!
What if I had big and floppy ears?I could hear everything, far and near!
What if - I begin, but Mumma walks in,"Riddhi, you'll be late, what are you thinking about?"
I find myself still standing with my brush in my hand, And I smile and think of my secret little land.
The worms laidsmall eggs on the leaves.
We fed themmulberry leaves.
They grew biggerand became fatter.
The larvae madesilk cocoons.
Inside thecocoons, the worms turned into pupae.
Some people breedsilkworms for a certain purpose.
In China, theykeep thousands of kinds of silkworms.
They make silkcloths using their cocoons.
My best teacher is a tall woman  with a light skin complexion.
She always makes her lessons interesting because of the stories from the past that she always tells us.
She brings songs that we sing in the lessons when we are bored   and we always dance to the songs.
She cares about all the students,  advises them and helps them solve their problems.   She is like a mother to us.
She always talks to the students about their   marks and advices them to improve.
She sometimes disciplines the naughty students that misbehave in her class.
My best teacher is so inspiring and is the best teacher any student could have.
Long,  long ago,  the sky god,  Nyame,  kept all stories locked in a wooden box, high in the sky. People down on earth had no stories to tell and they were very sad. They asked Anansi the Spider to help them.
Anansi spun a long thread,  and climbed up his sticky thread all the way to heaven. "Can I have the stories,  please?" he asked the sky god. But Nyame laughed at Anansi and said, "Oh,  these are very expensive stories. You wouldn't be able to pay for them, little spider."
"How much do the stories cost?" asked Anansi. "You'll have to bring me three rare and fierce animals," Nyame answered. "Bring a leopard with sharp teeth like spears, a hornet that stings people, and a snake that swallows people whole," said Nyame, laughing. He thought his stories were quite safe.
So Anansi climbed slowly back down his sticky thread to the earth. He thought and he thought, and he came up with a plan. He dug a deep hole, covered it with branches and dirt so it was hidden. He went home for supper. In the morning, sure enough, a leopard had fallen into his pit. He was furiously scratching at the side of the pit, but he couldn't get out.
"Oh, let me help you,  my dear friend!" said Anansi to the leopard. "Just lie down on these sticks and I'll pull you out." Anansi wound his sticky web round the leopard and the sticks, and pulled him up to heaven to show the sky god. But Nyame just laughed and said,  "Where are the other two?"
Anansi went back to earth to get the second creature. He thought and he thought and he came up with a plan. He filled a gourd with water and picked a banana leaf, and then went to the tree where the hornets lived. He held the banana leaf over his head and poured half the water over himself.
Anansi poured the rest of the water over the hornets' nest. He shouted, "Hey hornets! It is raining! Quick, get inside my gourd and it will keep you dry."Hornets don't like to get wet,  so they all flew into Anansi's gourd.
Anansi quickly spun a web across the opening of the gourd. The hornets couldn't get out, no matter how much they buzzed. He carried the gourd up to heaven and showed the sky god. But Nyame just said,  "Where's the last one?" (He wasn't laughing so much anymore.)
Anansi went down to earth again. He thought and thought and he thought, but he couldn't come up with a plan. So he asked his wife, who had a very good idea. They found a long thick branch and some strong vines. Then, they went to the stream where the snake lived, and began to argue. "The branch is longer!" "No, it isn't!" "Yes it is!"
Soon the snake came out and asked what the argument was. "I was arguing with my wife," said Anansi. "She says this stick is longer than you are. But I don't agree." The snake exclaimed, "Of course I'm longer than that stick! I'm very long! I'm a huge snake! Just put your stick next to me and measure!"
Anansi did that. And to keep the snake straight, Anansi tied him to the stick with the strong vine.After tying up the snake, Anansi took him to the sky god.
Nyame had to admit that Anansi had paid his price. He went to his wooden box, opened the lid, and gave all the stories to Anansi. Anansi carried the stories triumphantly down to earth. He shared them with his wife, and with all the other animals and people. Stories are for telling,  not for keeping in wooden boxes.
Anansi the Spider, and Rabbit were friends. They lived in a peaceful village in the mountains. Rabbit owned a big farm with lots of vegetables and fruit. Even though Rabbit shared generously with his friend, Anansi was unhappy and jealous.
So Anansi thought of a clever plan to take over Rabbit's farm. Soon Rabbit was left poor and homeless. Anansi was the proud owner of all Rabbit's land, vegetables, and fruit.
Anansi went to the market to sell his fruit and vegetables. He made so much money that he filled a big basket with it! With some of the money, he bought maize for his family, and put it on top of the money in the basket.
Anansi happily headed home with his basket on his head, singing. He was thinking about all the things he was going to buy with his money.
On the way, it started to drizzle. Soon the drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. Anansi the Spider left his basket on the side of the road to shelter under a tree. But from there he kept a close watch on his precious basket.
It started to rain even more heavily, and Anansi was getting cold and wet. So he ran into a hole. "I will stay in this hole until the rain stops," said Anansi to himself. "At least my money is protected by the maize I put on top of it."
A little while later, Vulture was flying around and spotted the basket on the side of the road. He saw that there was money and maize in the basket. So he covered the basket with his wings and waited for the rain to stop.
Anansi saw Vulture sitting on his basket. "Oh thank you, my friend, for protecting my basket," he said to the Vulture. "Excuse me, Anansi, did I hear you right?" asked Vulture. "Your basket? This basket is mine! I found it here on the road side!" Anansi could not believe his ears! "It's mine, I tell you!"
Furious, Anansi went and reported the theft to the chief. But Vulture said to the chief and his elders, "How could anyone leave a basket full of money and maize unguarded on the road?" "But I was watching my basket," said Anansi. "It's my money and my maize!" "I was looking after the basket when you came and said it was yours!" replied Vulture.
When the chief and his elders had listened carefully to both sides, they sent Anansi and Vulture away. They discussed the story for a long time. Eventually they reached a decision.
They summoned Anansi and the Vulture again. "We believe Vulture's story," they said. "He is not the thief. You were trying to claim something that was not yours." Anansi could not believe his ears! He burst into tears.
The news soon spread that the judgement had gone against Anansi. As he walked away, he heard Rabbit laughing and laughing. Rabbit went back to his farm and grew fruit and vegetables. But Anansi was poor again, with no friends.
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night.Because they weremade of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! Hemelted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose,he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Knock! Knock!
"Who is there?" I ask sleepily.
"It is me," a shrill voice says.
"Who is 'me'?" I ask.
"I told you,  it is o-n-l-y m-e," the same voice says.
"I don't know anyone called,  'o-n-l-y m-e'," I reply. I check that my mosquito net is tucked in around my bed.
"Well, my name is Amos." The voice sounds more shrill than before. It is very close to my ear.
"Amos who?" I ask as I look under the net.
"Amos Quito," the voice finally says. I feel a bite on my ear.
"Ouch!" I jump up and begin to search. "You will pay for this!" I shout.
Angrily, I get out of bed and switch on the light.
I declare war on the annoying Amos Quito!
Hello! Can you see me?I am not easy to spot.
I can see, but not very well.Although I have eight eyes.
Watch me jump. Watch me swing.I have shared these tricks with Spider-Man.
I can crawl up a wall. Don’t worry, I will not fall.The tips of my eight hairy legs can stick to anything!
I don’t sleep much.At night, I go looking for a snack.
I am like the police. I catch pests like mosquitoes, insects and flies!Oh wait, there's another one. Am off to catch it. BYE!
More about the spider!The smallest spider is as big as the tip of a pencil.And the larger spiders can be as big as a dinner plate. These spiders live in caves.
Here is an activity you can easily do at home. Observe a spider – do not disturb it. See how they can walk on eight legs, without getting them all tangled up.
Daddy has a little tight Ty.Daddy's Ty is redMummy made him that TyIt is my favorite Ty.
Daddy has a tight TyDaddy keeps that Ty in the closet.Daddy loves his TyBecause its mummy who made him that Ty.
Daddy has a tight TyWhen i grow upI will grow tallAnd help daddy ty his little tight Ty
One day,  Manu was walking.
At that time,  a lion was resting in the grass.
Manu was full of fear.
The lion woke up.
Manu climbed a tall tree.
The lion waited for Manu under the tree.
Manu fell asleep.
He fell down from the tree.
The lion ran away.
Manu started to run in the same direction as the lion.
When he realised,  he changed and run away.
Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.
The children never fought with each other. They helped their parents at home and in the fields.
But they were not allowed to go near a fire.
They had to do all their work during the night. Because they were made of wax!
But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.
One day the longing was too strong. His brother and sister warned him.
But it was too late! He melted in the hot sun.
The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.
But they made a plan. They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.
They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.
And as the sun rose, he flew away, singing in the morning light.
Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.
It has only one horn,  and no tail.
It is fat,  with a big stomach.
It is a powerful cow.
The shepherd loves this cow the most.
When the other cattle graze,  this one eats alone.
This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.
If you met such a cow,  what would you do?
It was evening. The birds were chirping and flying back to their nests.Putti and Akka were walking back from the park.
"Look, Akka! There's a butterfly on the bush!" said Putti."A butterfly? Look again!" said Akka."Huh?" said Putti.
They passed by Parvati's house."Akka, look, Parvati's dog is wearing ponytails today!" said Putti.Akka giggled. "You funny girl! Look again!" she said."Huh?" said Putti.
They walked past the big old Gulmohar tree."Akka! A snake!" screamed Putti and clung to Akka."Oh Putti, look again!" said Akka."Haaaa!" said Putti, and relaxed.
They passed by Raghav's house."Akka, how did Raghav's mother's hair grow long so quickly? I saw her yesterday and she had short hair!" said Putti.Akka laughed. "Putti, Putti, look again!""Aha!" said Putti.
They went past the old library."Ooooh Akka!" said Putti. "Have you ever seen such a big fruit on such a small plant?""You're seeing things today, Putti!" Akka said, laughing and ruffling Putti's hair. "Look again!""Aaaah!" said Putti.
"Walk faster, Putti, it's getting dark!" said Akka. "Look, the streetlights have been turned on!""Eeeeeeeee! A monster!" shouted Putti."Aw, look again, Putti!" said Akka."Phhshhhhh!" sighed Putti, relieved.
Putti and Akka reached home."Look, Putti! Aren't these Ajji's slippers?" asked Akka.*Ajji: Kannada for grandmother
They peered in through the window."Yes, Putti! Ajji is here! She said she would bring chakli!" said Akka.*Chakli: a fried, crunchy snack made with rice flour and gram flour.
"Better look again, Akka," said Putti. "What if that is not Ajji? What if it's someone else wearing a saree? What if it's just a saree draped over a chair? What if it's just a bundle of clothes. What if..."
"Look again, Putti!" said Akka.It WAS Ajji! And she had brought chakli!
Tingi lived with his grandmother.
He used to look after the cows with her.
One day the soldiers came.
They took the cows away.
Tingi and his grandmother ran away.
They hid in the bush until night.
Then the soldiers came back.
Grandmother hid Tingi under the leaves.
One of the soldiers put his foot right on him,  but he kept quiet.
When it was safe,  Tingi and his grandmother came out.
They crept home very quietly.
Fana and her family live in a busy town.
Fana has a cat, two hens, a goat and a dove.
One day, Fana saw other children throwing stones at doves.
Fana ran towards the children. She shouted, “Stop throwing stones.”
Fana took the two doves home to look after them.
She fed them and told her family how she saved them.
Fana and her parents took the doves to the clinic.
Fana tells her friends, “Animals are our friends. We protect them.”
Long ago, there was a clever cat and a foolish dog. The clever cat lived well in a wealthy family's house. The foolish dog starved on the street.
"How is it that a wealthy family allows you to live in their house?" the foolish dog angrily asked the clever cat.
The clever cat replied, "I live with people because I'm neat and I bury my waste. I ask for food saying, meow."
"If I do the same, will they allow me to live in a house?" asked the dog. The cat replied, "Yes, do what I have told you and they will allow you. They will give you food."
The foolish dog said, "Today, I will not hurt you." "He almost got me this time. I don't want to meet him again," said the cat, jumping away.
Based on the cat's advice, the foolish dog barked loudly at the door of a house.
The owners of the house beat him with a stick. "The cat fooled me. I will eat her when I get her," shouted the foolish dog.
While the cat was playing outside her house, the dog grabbed her. He said, "Last time you fooled me. You told me to bark at the gate of a house. The owners beat me. Now I will eat you."
"Listen dog, you can eat me, but let me play a little first. Just as I allow a rat to play before I eat her," replied the clever cat.
The dog asked, "How does the rat play?" The cat replied, "I let it go a little, and I tell it to count to three. While the rat is counting, I grab it."
The foolish dog let the cat go free and told her to count to three. The clever cat escaped and climbed up a tree. "Come down from the tree and count to three," asked the dog.
The clever cat answered, "Listen dog, you will never get me again. I'm not a fool. You can count to a hundred, a thousand or a million but you will never get me again!"
Sipho goes to town with his sister.
His sister is looking at the clothes in shops. Sipho is bored.
Sipho sees something he likes.
The shoes are on sale.
He tries them all on.
His sister buys him soccer shoes.
Why are they in such a hurry to get home?
Luckily he got to the soccer field on time! He is wearing his new soccer shoes.
Prem studied in class two. He went to the municipal school near his house. His teacher was always bubbling with new ideas.
One day, she asked the children to find and fill an empty matchbox.“Fill the matchbox with as many different things as you can, over one week. The one who packs in the most number of different things will get a prize next week.”
Prem liked theidea. At home, Prem tried to put his eraser and pencil sharpener in thematchbox. He managed to fit in only one. They were too big. This made himthink. What are the things I can put in?
While he was doing his homework, the lead from Prem's pencil broke and fell off. He put the piece in his matchbox. After sharpening his pencil, he put a small wood shaving in his matchbox.Prem started looking carefully for tiny things.
He could smell the poha his mother wascooking. In the kitchen, he found a small mustard seed, a cumin seed, and aseed of a red chilli. He put them in along with a grain each of sugar, rice andwheat. He added grains of maize, millet, green gram and other pulses.
The next day, heput in a small rubber band, a piece of wool, one strand of hair, and a piece ofthread.Prem now kept looked for tiny, teeny-weeny things. Thenext day, he added a rose thorn, a sunflower petal, a small twig, a tea leaf, atamarind leaf and a small stone.
There was still some space in thematchbox. So Prem put in a small piece of paper, a pin, a needle, a bead, anail and a small button.The matchbox was still not full. On the last day of theweek, Prem put in a lemon seed, an orange seed, and a pumpkin seed. Now thematchbox was packed. It couldn’t hold any more.
At school, eachchild counted the number of things stuffed in his or her matchbox. Somechildren had collected fifty things. One child had managed to stuff over ahundred things.
When it was Prem’s turn, he shook hismatchbox in the air. There was not a sound because it was stuffed fully! WhenPrem emptied his matchbox, everyone was surprised.
He had stuffed over a hundred-and-fifty little things in his matchbox! No one had come even close to him.So Prem won a new box of crayons!
Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased. “Ants don’t read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need.”
Little Ant would read all day, he’d read and read the day away.
The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.
His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.
In autumn when the leaves fall down.
The ants must keep food underground.
The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.
Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. “A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read.”
The ants go marching one by one. They march into the setting sun.
And Little Ant said “Hey, there’s one!”
The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger, carrying a bun.
When they return the Queen is glad. The stores are full. They cheer like mad.
Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.
His baby sister takes his hand “Now I think I understand.” “The way you love to read a book … Makes me want to take alook.”
Foxy Joxy was a sly fox. He sold big, fresh watermelons.Watermelons for sale!
“Your price is too high,” said Rabbit Jabbit.“You are asking too much,” said Gia Giraffe.
Foxy Joxy had a clever idea.
He slit open a big watermelon,
scooped out the fruit,
and gobbled it up.
Then he filled it with water!He took a needle and thread and sewed the watermelon back together.
He sold his watermelons for a cheap price.Many animals bought from Foxy Joxy.
“This watermelon has only water in it,” complained Funky Monkey.
“Well, you got what you paid for,” said Foxy Joxy.
“We need to teach Foxy Joxy a lesson,” said Ellie Elephant.
The animals gathered around and came up with a plan.“I have an idea,” said Oliver Owl.
They took an empty watermelon,
stuffed Foxy Joxy into it...
and played a game of football with it.
Foxy Joxy was dizzy!He learnt his lesson and never cheated again.
My name is Mia. I am going to the market with my Ma.
I am the best at hide-and-seek in the world!             You will never find me in the market.             And I will find the things on my Ma’s shopping list before you.
Find:      (1) 10 red chillies                           (2) 2 green tomatoes      (3) 1 potato      (4) 1 fat pumpkin
Oh no!                  How did you find me?
Find:      (1) 6 yellow bananas                                   (2) 3 oranges      (3) 1 red apple      (4) 1 green papaya with stem
You found me and the fruits on my Ma’s list!      It won’t happen again.
Find:       (1) 5 roses                                                    (2) 1 purple garland       (3) Jasmine flowers       (4) Flowery shorts
This is not fair!       I am the best at hiding in the world!
Find:     (1) 1 lungi with dots                                              (2) 1 sari with green stripes     (3) 1 school uniform with squares     (4) 1 plain black T-shirt
Did Ma tell you where I was hiding?        Let me see how you find me now.
Find:    (1) 3 pinching crabs                                  (2) 1 angry squid    (3) 7 prawns    (4) 2 fish on ice
You got lucky so far.              But you will never find me in my own house!
Find:      (1) 1 big pot                                                           (2) 1 wooden spoon      (3) 1 box of matches      (4) 1 bottle of water
You found me AGAIN!                                   Okay, I cannot play anymore.                                   I have to go eat lunch.
I would have won if Ma had not asked me to stop playing.          I am the best at hide-and-seek in the world!
Answer key:              (1) 10 red chillies (2) 2 green tomatoes (3) 1 potato (4) 1 fat pumpkin
Answer key:              (1) 6 yellow bananas (2) 3 oranges (3) 1 red apple (4) 1 green papaya with stem
Answer key:               (1) 5 roses (2) 1 purple garland (3) Jasmine flowers (4) Flowery shorts
Answer key:              (1) 1 lungi with dots (2) 1 sari with green stripes              (3) 1 school uniform with squares (4) 1 plain black T-shirt
Answer key:                (1) 3 pinching crabs (2) 1 angry squid (3) 7 prawns (4) 2 fish on ice
Answer key:              (1) 1 big pot (2) 1 wooden spoon (3) 1 box of matches (4) 1 bottle of water
Hello! This little boy's name is KIYAN.But he has many other names.
Mama calls him LADDOO.She says he is super sweet.Daddy calls him VEDOO.Daddy says he is funny.
Dadi calls him MEAOW MANI.She says his skin is soft like a cat's.
Dadu calls him BUNNY.He says he can only see two teeth.
Ira didi calls him GUNDRU.She says Kiyan is a little rascal.
Sahil bhaiya calls him CINDRU... don't know why!But he says Kiyan throws tantrums!
But when Kiyan plays a prank and hides somewhere, they are ALL angry with him.And shout...KIYAAAAAAAAAN!
WHAT ARE YOUR PET NAMES?
Colors,                                                       the beauty of the rainbow                                                                                            Red, orange, i count,Here we go, oops
Seven hundred or more ,                                                                  Beauty and glory                                                                   The colors are,                                                                     One, two,three                                                                     Here i go.
Dark and lovely,                                                   Bright and shining,                                                    Colors glittering,                                                    Sparkling to me
Long time ago, there was a man called Kato. He lived in Kabuusu town. He stayed with his dog in a small house.
One day Kato was very sick. He had no one to help him. When he recovered, he decided he would marry a woman who lived nearby.
He invited friends and relatives to attend the marriage ceremony. Kato was very excited because he thought he was getting a helper.
Many things were brought for the bride and her groom. These were baskets of millet, mats, bananas,  groundnuts, and other gifts for the home.
The wedding function ended and all the visitors left for their homes. Kato was ready to start a new life with his wife and the dog.
The next day, Kato served sweet banana to his wife, but she refused to eat.
When Kato went out to hunt, the woman ate all the sweet bananas.
Kato came back from hunting and he was hungry. He asked for sweet bananas. His wife said that the dog had eaten them all!
The following day, Kato went to his farm. When he came home, he found that his wife had eaten all the meat. She did not even share with the dog.
Another day, Kato went to visit his friend and when he came back, the woman had eaten all the groundnuts. The basket was completely empty. Kato was annoyed with his new wife.
Kato thought, "Something is wrong with this woman." He decided to apply magic. He put milk in a magic pot, put the pot under the bed, and went out hunting.
The woman saw the pot, and that it was full of milk. At once, she picked up the pot and put it to her mouth. She drank all the milk while the dog watched her.
Unfortunately, the pot got stuck to her mouth. She tried to remove the pot but all in vain. She shouted, and jumped up and down. But the pot stayed stuck. The dog watched all this.
Then the dog ran off to find Kato. The dog barked and barked, and jumped up and down. Kato realised that something was wrong at home.
They ran home together. Kato was very surprised to find his wife with a pot stuck to her mouth. He looked at her and wondered.
Kato touched his wife's cheek and the pot dropped down at once. The woman was very ashamed. She decided to go back to her parents' home.
Birds talk. And they talk a lot!
WAAAAHHHH!The Brahminy kite wails like a hungry baby.WAAAAHHHH!
FHWEE! FHWEE!The Malabar whistling thrush whistles like a happy child.FHWEE! FHWEE!
HU HU HU HU! HU HU HU HU!The laughing dove laughs as if it's being tickled.HU HU HU HU! HU HU HU HU!
PUK! PUK! PUK!The coppersmith barbet sounds like a hammer striking metal.PUK! PUK! PUK!
WAAAAHHHH! FHWEE! HU HU! PUK! Who is that? That is the racket-tailed drongo who can copy other birds!  WAAAAHHHH! FHWEE! HU HU! PUK!
We may not know what birds are saying, But we know who is talking.
His hoe was too short.
His doorway was too low.
His bed was too short.
His bicycle was too short.
This man was too tall!
He made a very long hoe handle.
He made very high door frames.
He made a very long bed.
He bought a very high bicycle.
He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.
He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for many years.
In Miwa Forest, there lived a monkey who was always sad. This was because every time she had a baby, it died.
The pain of losing her babies made Monkey jump up and down. She would jump to one branch, then to another, and cry out, "Kwi! Kwi! Kwi!"
Monkey was sadder when she saw other monkeys with their babies.
The sad monkey sat on a branch. Days passed and she cried more and more.
Then she gave birth again. She decided to take the baby to the path.She wanted people passing by, to see the baby and wish it well.
Monkey put her baby on the path. At that time, a hunter was returning home. He saw the baby monkey lying on the side of the path.
The hunter carried the baby monkey to his house. When the hunter reached home, his three sons wanted to hold the baby monkey.
The boys sang: Throw it up! Throw it down! Throw it to me! Throw it to him! The baby monkey was thrown from one child to the other.
Mother Monkey hid in a tree and watched them. She was afraid that this baby would also die, like the others.
Then the hunter's wife saw her children playing with the little monkey. She said, "Be careful! Bring it here. You will drop it!"
She took the baby monkey in her arms, and blessed it.
The hunter's wife put the baby monkey down. Mother Monkey picked the baby up and disappeared into the forest. Mother Monkey never lost another baby from then on.
God thought of making man, by joining all the bones,He thought of making man by joining all the bones.
Join together head bone to the neck bone
Join together neck bone to the shoulder bone
Join together shoulder bone to the chest bone
Join together chest bone to the waist bone
Join together waist bone to the thigh bone
Join together thigh bone to the leg bone
Join together one bone to another bone
Good Morning!Time to wake up.
I DON'T want to wake up!I DON'T want to do the big job!
I DON'T want to brush my teeth!I DON'T want to have a bath!I DON'T want to have idlis for breakfast!
I DON'T want to go to school!
Hmm...But, today's your class picnic at the zoo!
I DO like idlis with sugar!I DO want to go to school!I DO like singing while I take a bath!I DO want to use my new tooth brush!
Oops! This is urgent!I DO want to go for the big job!Here I come, like a rocket... DO please give way,DON'T stand in my way!
How many cats? 0 Zero cats.
How many cats? 1 One cat.
How many cats? 2 Two cats.
How many cats? 3 Three cats.
How many cats? 4 Four cats.
How many cats? 5 Five cats.
How many cats? 6 Six cats.
How many cats? 7 Seven cats.
How many cats? 8 Eight cats.
What is this we see? A kitten is stuck in a tree! "I will rescue you!"
"Mama,  can we keep him? Just one more!" How many cats? 9 Nine cats.
Zama is getting ready for school.
Dad is cooking porridge for breakfast. He mixes it with milk.
"Mummy has got the sweetest breast milk!" says Zama.
Milk has got fats, vitamins, calcium which gives Zama alot of energy for school.
The milk is ready.
Dad pours the milk,  with love.
"Dad,  I think this porridge needs more sugar and milk," says Zama.
"Mummy's milk tastes much better than Dad's milk," says Zama.
"Dad,  please in this milk asks Zama."
Dad adds sugar to Zama's milk.
"Wu! Dad! You added water in my milk!"
"Dad,  when will Mom be home?" asks Zama.
Do want to know about some animals? Ok, so let's.
Hi, I'm a goat. I eat grass.
Hi, I am a Camel. I live in deserts and I store water at my hump.
Hi, I am a Buffalo. I give milk to drink. Yum yummy milk. I love it. Do you?
Hi! I am a sheep. I give wool to make warm clothes.
I am a pig I love playing in the mud.
I am a dog I love to run and bark.
Hi! I am a rabbit I love to hop. And I also love eating carrots.
Era uma vez, um homem rico que tinha dois filhos. O homem rico escreveu em seu testamento que o primeiro filho ficaria com todas as suas vacas. E só um galo deveria ir para o seu segundo filho.
Então, depois que o homem morreu, seu primeiro filho ganhou todas as vacas. E o segundo filho só recebeu um galo.
Depois de um tempo, o filho rico ficou doente. Ele foi ao curandeiro para perguntar o que ele deveria fazer para melhorar. O curandeiro disse, "Você deveria abater um galo de uma cor especial."
O filho rico não sabia onde conseguir um galo de uma cor especial. Então ele lembrou do galo de seu irmão. Ele mandou algumas pessoas ao seu irmão.
O irmão disse a eles, "Tudo que eu tenho é este galo. Mas se ele pode fazer meu irmão melhorar, prefiro perder o galo." Ele generosamente deu o galo.
As pessoas o abateram e deram de comer para o irmão doente. O irmão se recuperou de sua doença.
Depois de um tempo a coisa mais curiosa aconteceu. No corpo do irmão rico começou a crescer penas.
Ele não podia acreditar no que estava vendo.
Ele foi aos anciões. Eles disseram, "Esse é o resultado de ter sido injusto com seu irmão. Você pegou todas as vacas e o galo que seu pai deixou para ele." Os anciões disseram ao irmão, "Para melhorar seu irmão deve perdoá-lo."
Os anciões continuaram, "Vamos pegar esta pulseira como um sinal de perdão e dar a seu irmão. Se ele cuspir nela, você será curado."
Os anciãos levaram a pulseira para o irmão e disseram, "Cuspa nela e perdoe seu irmão." O irmão cuspiu na pulseira.
Como resultado, os anciões decidiram dar metade das vacas do irmão rico para o irmão pobre.
One day,  Rabbit was walking by the riverside.
Hippo was there too,  going for a stroll and eating some nice green grass.
Hippo didn't see that Rabbit was there and she accidentally stepped on Rabbit's foot. Rabbit started screaming at Hippo,  "You Hippo! Can't you see that you're stepping on my foot?"
Hippo apologised to Rabbit,  "I'm so sorry. I didn't see you. Please forgive me!" But Rabbit wouldn't listen and he shouted at Hippo,  "You did that on purpose! Someday,  you'll see! You're going to pay!"
Rabbit went to find Fire and said,  "Go,  burn Hippo when she comes out of the water to eat grass. She stepped on me!"  Fire answered,  "No problem,  Rabbit,  my friend. I'll do just what you ask."
Later,  Hippo was eating grass far from the river when,  "Whoosh!" Fire burst into flame. The flames began to burn Hippo's hair.
Hippo started to cry and ran for the water. All her hair was burned off by the fire. Hippo kept crying,  "My hair has burned in the fire! My hair is all gone! My beautiful hair!"
Rabbit was happy that Hippo's hair was burned. And to this day,  for fear of fire,  the hippo never goes far from the water.
This is Natabo. She has six brothers.
Her parents give her a small pot. She loves it.
One day her brothers break the pot.
Natabo cannot find her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away. She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Please come down," they ask.
Her brothers sing,  "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
Once upon a time the rabbit was a great friend of the monkey.
One day the rabbit said,  "Let's go for a walk and look for something to eat." The monkey agreed,  but it was a trap for him!
They went to a field of maize and started to eat it.
But the clever rabbit had spoken to the owners of the farm,  to catch the monkey and show him he was foolish.
The clever rabbit started shouting,  "Robbers! Robbers! Your maize is all gone!" And he jumped up and ran away.
Suddenly the owners appeared and found the monkey trying to run away. But he has a long tail and it was stopping him.
The owners followed him,  shouting,  "Stop! Stop! We saw you,  you are the monkey."
But they caught him and started beating him.
He couldn't stand the pain so he said,  "I was with my friend Rabbit. He is the one who invited me."
But the owners cut his tail off and told him,  "Go and tell your friend that we cut off your tail!"
Then they went to the rabbit's house and cooked the monkey's tail to eat. The rabbit invited the monkey for lunch.
At the end of the meal the rabbit asked the monkey if he knew what he had eaten. The foolish monkey answered,  "No I don't!"
The rabbit told him that he had eaten his own tail and then ran away. And from then on they became enemies!
Nusha was a little girl who wasn't very good at anything.
But when she was 12, she found she could fly.
She flew to school when she was late.
She flew to her grandma's house on weekends.
She flew to the market because it was quicker.
She flew across the sea to church.
She flew along the beach and saw people kissing.
She flew up to get coconuts from trees.
People paid her to help fix their roofs.
All her friends asked her how she did it.
"You have to think very, very hard," she said, "and you have to really really want to do it."
One day she met a boy who could fly too.
They started to go out together.
Maybe they got married and had children in the end.
Sherry has got very little hair. But she looks smart.
Nandi has plated hair. She looks smart too.
Cathy has the longest hair.
Tom covers his hair whenever it is raining.
Uncle Jimmy has beards.
Nebanda normally combs her hair nicely before she lives for any function.
Tabo has cut his hair.
Mubbalya has shaved his hair off.
Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie,  Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.
The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can see the huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing. "There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.
Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone,  I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes,  12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."
The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says. "I like counting in 4s," says Duksie,  "it's quicker."  "I'm going to count in 3s,  just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.
Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look,  there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did you pack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asks the children.
The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side,  to balance the load.
"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see,  how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"
Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself,  "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen and get a surprise for the children!"
Back at the farm,  Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them,  "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what it I have for you today?"
She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what she might bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!
"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of yellow apples falls onto the table. "See,  I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children,  "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"
First the children count the apples in 2s. The count: 2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  and 1 apple left over, Altogether there are 17 apples.
Next,  they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?
"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.
Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted.  "Yay!" shout the children."
There was a time when all the animals lived together as friends. One day, they decided to have a meeting to elect a king.
Rooster wanted to be king. So he lied to the other animals. He told them, "The red comb on my head is fire! Don't touch the comb on my head!"
The other animals believed Rooster. They decided to elect Rooster as their king. The animals hoped that Rooster's fire would help them in cold weather.
Then came a day when it rained. And rained. And rained. It was cold. Everything was wet and cold.
"Where can we get fire to warm our bodies?" Rabbit asked the other animals.
"We can get fire from the comb on Rooster's head. Rooster is our king because he has fire on his head," said Monkey.
The animals agreed with Monkey. They sent Fox to collect fire from king Rooster.
Fox found Rooster in a deep sleep. So he decided to take fire without asking Rooster.
Fox collected some dry grass. He put the grass next to the comb on Rooster's head. Nothing happened. The grass did not catch fire.
"Wake up king Rooster!" yelled Fox. "We need fire now."
But Rooster could not give fire to Fox.Fox was angry.
Fox went back to the other animals. He told them the truth about the comb on Rooster's head. From that day, no one was afraid of Rooster.  And foxes eat roosters and their families.
Khayanga lived with her parents happily until they died when she was ten years old.
Khayanga was taken in by Rosa,  a distant relative. Rosa was kind to Khayanga, but she was old,  frail and poor.
Khayanga often visited her parents' graves to tell them of her misery.
One day when she visited, she received a gift. It was a very special Gourd which appeared from her parents' graves.
The Gourd sang a beautiful and soothing song. Khayanga recognised the voice as that of her late mother. It went like this.
Khayanga carried her special Gourd everywhere. With her Gourd, Khayanga felt her parents' presence and protection.
One day,  something bad happened to her special Gourd. It broke when she was fetching water in the river. Khayanga's heart broke as well.
Khayanga held the pieces of the broken Gourd in her small hands and sang:
Khayanga heard her mother's voice saying to her: "Our child,  pick up the pieces that are left. Fetch water with them and wash your feet. When you finish washing, close your eyes." Khayanga obeyed and suddenly, the broken Gourd became whole once again.
Khayanga continued to carry her Gourd everywhere she went. Wherever she passed, people whispered to each other, "What type of gourd is this?" With her special Gourd, Khayanga received everything she needed.
With the special Gourd, Khayanga knew that her parents were watching over her. Nothing bad could happen to her.
This is Azizi. Azizi is my doll.
I like Azizi because he always smiles.
After I wake up I wash my face. Then I look for Azizi.
When I find Azizi I brush his hair.
When I eat breakfast I feed Azizi.
When I eat sweets I give one to Azizi.
But Azizi never eats his sweet. I wonder why!
I walk around the compound picking flowers.
I give a flower to Azizi. But he never says,  "Thank you."
I wash Azizi clean before my mother bathes me.
I dress Azizi in red because I love the colour red.
When I go to sleep,  I lay Azizi beside me.
This is Jaaka the fisherman from Naminya.
He fishes on the river Nile.
He has a boat,  fishing net and a hook.
He always wakes up very early in the morning to catch the Nile perch.
At around 10am,  he's selling his catch in Jinja central market.
Jaaka what happened? Was it a loss? He's so sad.
"Today the situation is bad. The Nile breeze did not permit me to fish. And one perch swam away with my hook."
"But I have hope that tomorrow will be good,  because I've bought a new hook."
This is Cat. This is Dog.
Cat and Dog want to draw. Cat and Dog want to colour. Cat and Dog want to make art. Dog starts.He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a square.
First Dog draws an oval. The oval is the body of Cat.Wow, that is simple!
Then he draws two triangles on top of the oval.The two triangles are the ears of Cat and he draws a black triangle in the oval. The black triangle is the nose of Cat and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of Cat.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is easy!
Then he draws the mouth of Cat. The mouth is a line.It looks like the letter ‘w’ and he draws the hairs of Cat. Three hairs on the left side and three hairs on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Cat. The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Cat.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Cat. The tail is a long line.
At last he draws some stripes on the body of Cat and he colours the body orange. Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is beautiful!
Now it is Cat's turn. He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a rectangle.
First Cat draws an oval. The oval is the body of Dog.Wow, that is good!
Then he draws two black forms on top of the oval.The two black forms are the ears of Dog and he draws a black circle in the oval.The black circle is the nose of Dog and he draws a line above the nose.
Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of dog.The eyes are two dots.The eyebrows are two lines.Wow, that is perfect!
Then he draws the mouth of Dog. The mouth is a line. The shape is again the letter ‘w’ and he draws some dots around the mouth of Dog. Three on the left side and three on the right side.
The drawing is almost finished. He draws the arms and legs of Dog.The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Dog.The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Dog.The tail looks like a flower.
At last he draws some black circles on the body of Dog and he colours the body yellow.Then the drawing is finished.Wow, that is wonderful!
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye drawing of Cat.Bye bye Dog.Bye bye drawing of Dog.
Flying across the morning sky,Are birds in a hungry mood.Spot the one who has caught,A yummy worm for its food!
Butterflies of different colours,Are flitting flower to flower.But there’s one that stands out,Because it’s one colour all over.
A cheerful bunch of kites,Is merrily hopping about.But one’s not quite the same,Can you find the odd one out?
Big and small squares,Are shapes you see everywhere.There’s one grill that’s different,Where is it hidden, here or there?
Look among the green leaves,Of this big, old tree.There’s a branch with a speck of colour,Wherever can it be?
Planes flying across the sky,Leave behind a straight trail.But one of them is rather odd,And instead makes a curvy tail.
A line of chattering birds,Are sitting above, can you see?But one likes to be quiet,Whichever could it be?
A flock of white clouds,Gleams on a bright summer day.But one decides to be rainy,And doesn’t care what the others say.
A long day is done,And the night has just begun.Of all the streetlights,Find one that shines like the sun.
Bats sleep when the sun is out,And wake when it's night.Can you find the odd one,Who is still sleeping tight?
Outer space has many planets,Shiny and brightly lit.Spot one that’s unique,Because it has a ring around it.
I see fire again.
The fire is burning brightly.
The fire can cook meat and vegetables.
The fire can keep me warm.
The orange light of the fire gives me light when it is dark.
The fire crackles and pops.
Fire is powerful and can be dangerous.
We must be careful when lighting fires or playing with fire.
Long ago,  there was no night in Opio's village. People slept when they were tired and worked when they were awake.
One day Opio went out hunting with his dogs. After a short time,  his dogs started to chase an antelope. Opio followed them. He ran for many hours. Every time he became tired,  he rested. Then he would run again. But he could not find his dogs.
After many days,  he came to a village. He went to one of the houses and said to the owner,  "I have chased an antelope for a long time and I am very tired. I want to rest." The man said,  "Sit down and rest. Would you like some beer?" Opio was very thirsty so he drank some. Then he went to sleep.
When he woke up,  he couldn't see. He opened and closed his eyes many times. "You have given me something very bad to drink," he said to the man. "I can't see properly anymore!" "There is nothing wrong with you," the man replied. "It's night now. Haven't you ever seen night? When the day leaves,  the night comes."
Opio asked many questions about the night. He began to like it very much. He and his new friend talked until morning. He stayed for another day so that he could see the night come again.
The next morning he asked his friend,  "How can I take the night to my own village? I want my people to see the night." The man explained,  "When it starts to get dark this evening,  walk to your village. If you look straight in front,  the night will follow you. If you look back,  the night will go away."
Opio did as he was told. That evening,  he began to walk towards his village. He felt the dark night behind him as he walked. He was tempted to look back,  but he did not.
When he came to his village,  the villagers were afraid. They asked Opio,  "What disease have you brought to us? What is this dark thing following you?" Opio said,  "My friends,  this dark thing is called night. You are afraid and I was afraid,  too."
Opio continued to explain,  "You will learn to like the night. When the light comes we can work and when night comes,  we can rest."
And that is how night came to Opio's village.
It is dry.
The sun is hot.
It is windy.
It is cloudy.
It is cold.
It is raining.
There is thunder.
I see a rainbow.
Once upon a time,  Hen and Eagle were friends. They lived in peace with all the other birds. None of them could fly.
One day,  there was famine in the land. Eagle had to walk very far to find food. She came back very tired. "There must be an easier way to travel!" said Eagle.
After a good night's sleep,  Hen had a brilliant idea. She began collecting the fallen feathers from all their bird friends. "Let's sew them together on top of our own feathers," she said. "Perhaps that will make it easier to travel."
Eagle was the only one in the village with a needle,  so she started sewing first. She made herself a pair of beautiful wings and flew high above Hen. Hen borrowed the needle but she soon got tired of sewing. She left the needle on the cupboard and went into the kitchen to prepare food for her children.
But the other birds had seen Eagle flying away. They asked Hen to lend them the needle to make wings for themselves too. Soon there were birds flying all over the sky.
When the last bird returned the borrowed needle,  Hen was not there. So her children took the needle and started playing with it. When they got tired of the game,  they left the needle in the sand.
Later that afternoon,  Eagle returned. She asked for the needle to fix some feathers that had loosened on her journey. Hen looked on the cupboard. She looked in the kitchen. She looked in the yard. But the needle was nowhere to be found.
"Just give me a day," Hen begged Eagle. "Then you can fix your wing and fly away to get food again." "Just one more day," said Eagle. "If you can't find the needle,  you'll have to give me one of your chicks as payment."
When Eagle came the next day,  she found Hen scratching in the sand,  but no needle. So Eagle flew down very fast and caught one of the chicks. She carried it away. Forever after that,  whenever Eagle appears,  she finds Hen scratching in the sand for the needle.
As the shadow of Eagle's wing falls on the ground,  Hen warns her chicks. "Get out of the bare and dry land." And they respond: "We are not fools. We will run."
Lynne, Oupa Karel and Anton were getting things ready for Lynne's birthday party.
Anton and Lynne are going to bake a cake. Oupa Karel reads the recipe.
"Let's mix these ingredients in the big bowl," said Lynne.
Anton stirred the ingredients and made a big mess.
"The cake feels heavy now," said Oupa Karel.
"Your friends have arrived," said Oupa Karel.
Anton thought the first present would be heavy because it was big.
It was a pillow and it weighed very little.
Anton thought the next present would be light because it was small.
It was a painted rock and it weighed a lot.
The children said that 1 kilogram of rocks weighs the same as 1 kilogram of feathers.
Lynne's cake was burnt.
Lynne was very sad.
Auntie Mavis asked Anton to guess how much her present weighed.
"It weighs the same as the cake that burned," said Anton.
Everyone said, "happy birthday, Lynne."
Let me tell youabout the palm tree.
This tree liveswhen everything else is dry.
The shade from apalm tree is always cool.
We eat fruit fromthe palm tree.
We use palmleaves to thatch our houses.
We make broomsand mats from palm leaves.
We use palm treeseeds for fuel.
Do you see whythe palm tree is important?
My village has goats. It is far from big cities.
Mother said, "Zainab, we have a present for your sixth birthday."
Mother, aunt and I waited for the bus.
I sat on mother’s lap. I slept the whole way.
We reached the market. I saw a beautiful blue helicopter.
One stall had fruits. I asked mother, “Which ones are these?”
Mother said, “These are apples.” I begged, “Please, buy me one.”
I forgot my mother’s hand. I thought only of my apple.
When I finished eating, I was alone. I started to cry.
A woman took me where there were other children.
I thought children were sold at the market. I cried more.
A man asked, "Where is Zainab?"I hid away from him.
My mother's familiar voice called, "Zainab!" I was very happy.
My aunt pulled out a beautiful helicopter. "It's yours!" she said.
My dinosaur and I look at my birds in the sky.
My birds and I meet Chimpanzee in the tree.
My chimpanzee and I play with my giraffes on the hill.
My giraffes and I make monkey balls from clay.
My monkey and I eat bananas with Gorilla every day.
My gorilla and monkey fear Tortoise in every way.
Tortoise and I go home very slowly with Snake.
Snake and I love to hiss and sing songs by the lake.
My entire family and I live together in great happiness!
One day there was a great famine in the land. No one had anything to eat except the crows. Each morning they flew a long distance to where there was a tree with ripe figs in the middle of a wide river. Then they flew back with the figs for themselves and their relatives. The sight of so many figs made Anansi's mouth water. How could he get them for himself?
He thought of a plan. He carefully covered his bottom with sticky beeswax. Then he took a piece of clay pot and went to see the crows. “Please could you help me?” he asked. “I need a live coal to get my fire going again.” As they were getting the coal from the fire, Anansi carefully sat firmly on one of the largest figs, so that it would stick to his bottom. He thanked the crows, and hurried home to enjoy the fig.
But one fig wasn't enough for him. He went back a second time, and did the same. When he went back a third time, the crows began to get suspicious. “Why do you keep coming back to us to get a coal?” they said. Anansi answered, “Every time when I get home, the coal has burnt out.” “You're lying!” said the crows. “You just want our food!” “That's not true,” said Anansi. And he started crying.
The crows felt sorry for him. The next morning at first light, each crow gave him a feather. He flew with them to the fig tree in the middle of the wide river. When he saw the luscious figs, Anansi wanted them all for himself. Each time a crow tried to pick a fig, he shouted out, “That one is mine! I saw it first!” And then he took the fig and put it into his bag. Eventually he had all the figs and the crows had none.
He was left all alone as the darkness began to fall. “If I don't want to stay in this tree for the rest of my life,” he said to himself, “I'll just have to jump into the air like the crows.” So he took a deep breath, jumped, and PLOP! He fell into the river right among the crocodiles.
“What do we have here?” said a gruff crocodile voice. “A tasty morsel to eat, nyum”. “Oh please don't” said Anansi. And he began to cry. “I'm one of you, don't you know? I got lost in the days of your grandfathers and no one was able to find me. You're the first of my relatives I've ever met!” He cried so much that the crocodiles felt sorry for him.
The oldest crocodile said, “We'll know you're one of us if you can eat and enjoy mud soup just like we do.” They gave him a pot of dirty brown water. “Just like my grandmother used to make it!” Anansi said. But he made a hole in the ground with his back foot, and a hole in the pot with his front foot. As he pretended to drink the soup, it oozed down through the pot into the hole beneath his feet.
“Delicious!” he exclaimed, giving back the empty pot. "Now we know you are definitely one of us," the crocodiles said. So they allowed Anansi to sleep in their hole with them for the night. "Tomorrow morning I'll tell you the story of my life," said Anansi as they fell asleep.
Early the next morning, before first light, Anansi woke up one of the crocodiles. "I want to go and fetch my wife and children from across the river, so that they can help me tell my story. Will you help me before the others wake up?" he asked the crocodile.
The crocodile was grumpy at being woken up so early. “Please help me! You swim much faster than I do,” Anansi said. The crocodile agreed, and Anansi rode on his back to the bank of the river. He climbed off quickly. “I'll be back soon! Don't go away!” Anansi said, as he disappeared through the grass.
As far as we know, the crocodile is waiting for him still, with just his long snout and his beady eyes above the surface of the river.
I saw a big truck driving down the road.
A car came driving up the road.
The truck driver was talking on his cellphone.
He was not looking at the road.
There was a big accident.
An ambulance and the police came to help.
Two tow trucks came. They towed the truck and the car.
I was shocked.
An apple fell from a tree under which Rabbit was sleeping.
Rabbit heard a voice say, “Run Rabbit run!”
Rabbit told Chicken, “Something fell and I heard, ‘Run Rabbit run!'”
Chicken started running when she heard what Rabbit said.
They told Dog, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Dog started running with Rabbit and Chicken.
Dog told Horse, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Horse started to run with the others.
Donkey asked, “Why are you running?” Horse replied, “I don’t know.”
Donkey started running with them.
Donkey told Cow, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Cow was worried and started to run as well.
Cow told Cat, “Rabbit heard something falling and she ran.”
Cat started running with the other animals.
They met a boy. “Don’t you know what happened?” he asked.
“It was me who said, ‘Run Rabbit run!’” laughed the boy.
There was once a girl called Chikondi who lived with her parents near the village of Chionda. One day Chikondi's mother sent her to fetch water at the well.
On the way,  she met her friends. They were going to the forest to get firewood. Chikondi wanted to go with them. "Please wait for me under this  masuku tree!" she said,  "I have to fetch water for my mother." But her friends didn't want to wait.
"All right,  I'll catch up with you in the forest!" said Chikondi She ran off to fetch water and take it to her mother. Then she went to the forest to look for her friends.
She followed a path that led to a stream. On the other side of the stream were many tiny paths each one,  leading in a different direction. "Which path had her friends taken?" she wondered.
She chose the biggest path,  and walked and walked,  but she could not find her friends. She was so tired that when she sat under a tree to rest,  she fell fast asleep.
When Chikondi woke up,  it was dark. In the darkness,  yellow eyes were gleaming. She was surrounded by hyenas! She was too terrified even to cry out. She tried running,  but the hyenas circled her hungrily.
"Don't move," said the gruff voice of the biggest hyena. "If you run,  we'll eat you!" "Please let me go home!" Chikonde pleaded.
But instead the hyenas took Chikondi to their house in the forest. It was a dirty hut full of bones and buzzing flies. She lay down and pretended to go to sleep.
In the darkness,  she heard the hyenas talking to each other. "How is the fire doing?" one hyena asked. "Is the water boiling?" "Everything is ready," was the reply. "Should I bring her?" "Yes,  yes!" growled the other hyenas. "We're hungry!" They were ready to drag Chikondi out of the hut.
But the big hyena spoke,  "Hyenas,  wait. Remember the rule of the village. No hyena may eat alone. We have to invite the whole family to share a meal." "I'll go and call the in-laws," said his wife. "I'll go and fetch my cousins," said the small hyena. "I'll fetch our brothers and sisters," said another. "And I will remain here with our food," said the big hyena.
The big hyena sat in the doorway of the hut and the others went off in different directions. They took a long time,  and the big hyena began to doze in front of the warm fire. Soon he was snoring. This was Chikondi's chance! But how was she going to get past the hyena? He was so big he filled the whole doorway.
There was only one way. She took a flying leap right over the hyena's back,  and ran as fast as her legs could carry her.
Just then the other hyenas returned,  and saw what had happened. They ran after her,  howling with anger and disappointment. But it was too late.
As she came to her village,  one of the villagers recognised her and shouted,  "Chikondi,  "Chikondi is coming,  "Chikondi is coming." Her father and mother ran out to meet her. They hugged her,  while thanking God for saving their child,  ""Chikondi,  "Chikondi  we thought you had died!"
From that day,  "Chikondi and the other children never again went back to the forest alone.
A long time ago,  there lived a man called Mulongo and his wife Nambuya. They had two children,  Mukhwana and Namono. There was a famine in the land where they lived. All the villagers,  including Mulongo and his family,  would leave their homes early to look for food in the forest.
One day,  Mulongo,  his wife and children decided to go deep in the forest in search of something to eat. From morning to evening they looked for food but they found nothing. Nambuya urged her husband to go further into the forest. Mulongo led the way as Nambuya and the two children followed.
Suddenly Mulongo saw a beautiful banana plantation. He called his wife and said,  "Is that not a banana plantation? I can see bananas and other food crops. I wonder whose it is." They moved on and soon saw a house in the middle of the plantation. They stopped,  looked in all directions,  but there was no one around. Because they were hungry and it was nearly night time,  they decided to sit and wait for the owner.
Suddenly they heard heavy breathing close to the house. They were frightened to see a huge ogre arrive. "Who are you and what do you want?" asked the ogre in a fearful voice. Mulongo in a trembling voice said,  "We came looking for food because there is famine in our place." The ogre gave them food.
For several days the ogre allowed Mulongo and his family to eat his crops without asking for anything in return. One morning,  however,  the ogre said to Nambuya,  "I want you to cook your son for me to eat when I come back this evening." When the ogre had gone Mulongo went into the bush and killed some small animals,  which he asked his wife to cook for the ogre. Meanwhile he asked Mukhwana to climb up a leafy mango tree and hide.
In the evening the ogre returned and asked,  "Have you cooked Mukhwana for me?" Mulongo's wife answered,  "Yes." She gave the ogre the meat and he greedily ate everything. Then he said,  "Tomorrow you cook your daughter."
The following morning Mulongo and his wife did as they had done on the first day. Namono was hidden up the mango tree. When the ogre returned he said,  "Did you cook Namono?" Again,  Nambuya told the ogre that she had done so.
After eating,  the ogre instructed Nambuya to cook her husband Mulongo,  the next day. Nambuya was perturbed but Mulongo said he would go out again and catch some animals to cook. He did that and after giving the meat to his wife,  he also climbed up the mango tree to hide.
At dusk the ogre came back. Nambuya gave the meat to the ogre who enjoyed it very much. He told Nambuya,  "Tomorrow cook yourself." When the ogre had left Nambuya called her husband to advise her. Mulongo said,  "Go and look for some small animals and cook them for the ogre. When everything is ready,  come up the tree where we are."
The ogre came back in the afternoon and started eating his tasty evening meal of sweet meat. He felt sleepy,  went to lie under the mango tree and began snoring. But not so long after,  the ogre woke up because he heard noises above him. The ogre looked up to the tree and saw Mulongo and his wife and children.
The ogre was very angry. "So you deceived me? Let me come and get you," he shouted. As the ogre was struggling to climb up the tree,  Mulongo quickly thought of a trick and said,  "It will be easier for you to reach us if you tie a rope around your neck and we help to pull you up."
The ogre ran into the house,  brought a strong rope and after tying it around his neck he threw the other end of the rope to Mulongo. Mulongo and his wife and children started pulling the ogre up as they twisted the rope. The rope soon tightened around the ogre's neck until he could not breathe and died. Mulongo and his family came down the tree and took over the ogre's house and property.
Grandma's garden was wonderful. It was full of sorghum, millet, and cassava. But best of all were the bananas. Although Grandma had many grandchildren, I secretly knew that I was her favourite. She invited me often to her house. She also told me little secrets. But there was one secret she did not share with me. Where she ripened bananas.
One day I saw a big straw basket placed in the sun outside Grandma's house. When I asked what it was for, the only answer I got was, "It's my magic basket." Next to the basket, there were several banana leaves that Grandma turned from time to time. I was curious. "What are the leaves for, Grandma?" I asked. The only answer I got was, "They are my magic leaves."
It was so interesting watching Grandma, the bananas, the banana leaves and the big straw basket. But Grandma sent me off to my mother on an errand. "Grandma, please, let me watch as you prepare." "Don't be stubborn, child, do as you are told," she insisted. I took off running.
When I returned, Grandma was sitting outside but with neither the basket nor the bananas. "Grandma,  where is the basket, where are all the bananas, and where..." But the only answer I got was, "They are in my magic place." It was so disappointing!
Two days later, Grandma sent me to fetch her walking stick from her bedroom. As soon as I opened the door, I was welcomed by the strong smell of ripening bananas. In the inner room was grandma's big magic straw basket. It was well hidden by an old blanket. I lifted it and sniffed that glorious smell.
Grandma's voice startled me when she called, "What are you doing? Hurry up and bring me the stick." I hurried out with her walking stick. "What are you smiling about?" Grandma asked. Her question made me realise that I was still smiling at the discovery of her magic place.
The following day when Grandma came to visit my mother, I rushed to her house to check the bananas once more. There was a bunch of very ripe ones. I picked one and hid it in my dress. After covering the basket again, I went behind the house and quickly ate the banana. It was the sweetest banana I had ever tasted.
The following day, when Grandma was in the garden picking vegetables, I sneaked in and peered at the bananas. Nearly all were ripe. I couldn't help taking a bunch of four. As I tiptoed towards the door, I heard Grandma coughing outside. I just managed to hide the bananas under my dress and walked past her.
The following day was market day. Grandma woke up early. She always took ripe bananas and cassava to sell at the market. I did not hurry to visit her that day. But I could not avoid her for long.
Later that evening I was called by my mother and father, and Grandma. I knew why. That night as I lay down to sleep, I knew I could never steal again. Not from grandma, not from my parents, and certainly not from anyone else.
Monkey lived in a big tree on the bank of a river. In the middle of the river there was a small island. Lots of fruit trees grew on that island.
Monkey wanted to go and eat the fruit. He saw a big rock half way across the river and he thought he could jump onto the rock,  and then onto the island.
He jumped into the air and landed on the rock. He jumped again and reached the island. He enjoyed eating the fruit and then went back home. He did this several times.
But Crocodile lived in the river with his wife! The wife said,  "Dear husband,  you should go and lie on the rock. The colour of your skin matches the colour of the rock."
A few days later,  Crocodile saw Monkey coming onto the island. He quietly climbed over the rock and carefully lay down on it and kept his face underwater.
Monkey finished eating and was ready to go back. But the rock looked higher than usual,  so he spoke to the rock,  "Dear rock,  you seem to have grown. Are you all right?"
Crocodile was a fool and thought the rock must be a talking rock. So he answered Monkey and said,  "I look bigger because a big crocodile is lying on me."
Monkey said,  "Dear Crocodile,  I know you want to eat me. I am very old and you can have my body. But I must say goodbye to my children in that big tree." So Crocodile gave him a ride on his back!
As soon as they were there,  Monkey climbed the tree and said,  "Thank you for the ride,  my dear friend. Goodbye,  now you can go home!" But Crocodile said,  "But you promised."
Monkey laughed and said,  "What a fool you were to believe me!" and disappeared behind the branches of the tree. Crocodile never did catch clever Monkey!
Dog
Duck
Cow
Donkey
Mouse
Cat
Sheep
Goat
Pig
Chicken
Mzi lives in a thatched house.
Thulani lives in a square house.
This house is a rectangle.
The roof of this house is a triangle.
This man is building his own house.
This house is new.
This house is old.
I wish I lived in this house.
Gemo and Nelson were brothers.
Gemo went to school every day, but Nelson did not.
Their father went to work in the town.Their mother worked in the garden.
One day his father left some money on the table.Nelson took the money!
His father was very angry.
So Nelson ran away.He walked and walked all day.
He sat under a tree all night.
His brother Gemo found him under the tree, and took him home.
"Why did you steal the money?" asked his father.
"Why did you run away?" asked his mother.
"I am very, very sorry," said  Nelson, and he returned the money.
They hugged him and were happy again.
One time, there was a great famine in the land. No one had anything to eat except the crows. Each morning they flew a long distance to where there was a tree with ripe figs in the middle of a wide river. They always flew back with the figs for themselves and their relatives. The sight of so many figs made Anansi's mouth water. How could he get them for himself?
He thought of a plan. He carefully covered his bottom with sticky beeswax. Then he took a piece of clay pot and went to see the crows. "Please could you help me?" he asked. "I need a live coal to get my fire going again." As they were getting the coal from the fire, Anansi carefully sat firmly on one of the largest figs. It stuck to his bottom. He thanked the crows, and hurried home to enjoy the fig.
But one fig wasn't enough for him. He went back a second time, and did the same. When he went back a third time, the crows began to get suspicious. "Why do you keep coming back to us to get a coal?" they said. Anansi answered, "Every time when I get home, the coal has burnt out." "You're lying!" said the crows. "You just want our food!" "That's not true," said Anansi. And he started crying.
The crows felt sorry for him. The next morning at first light, each crow gave him a feather. He flew with them to the fig tree in the middle of the wide river. When he saw the luscious figs, Anansi wanted them all for himself. Each time a crow tried to pick a fig, he shouted out, "That one is mine! I saw it first!" And then he took the fig and put it into his bag. Eventually he had all the figs and the crows had none.
He was left all alone as the darkness began to fall. "If I don't want to stay in this tree for the rest of my life," he said to himself, "I'll just have to jump into the air like the crows." So he took a deep breath, jumped, and PLOP! He fell into the river right among the crocodiles.
"What do we have here?" said a gruff crocodile voice. "A tasty morsel to eat." "Oh please don't," said Anansi. And he began to cry. "I'm one of you, don't you know? I got lost in the days of your grandfathers and no one was able to find me. You're the first of my relatives I've ever met!" He cried so much that the crocodiles felt sorry for him.
The oldest crocodile said, "We'll know you're one of us if you can eat and enjoy mud soup just like we do." They gave him a pot of dirty brown water. "Just like my grandmother used to make it!" Anansi said. But he made a hole in the ground with his back foot, and a hole in the pot with his front foot. As he pretended to drink the soup, it oozed down through the pot into the hole beneath his feet.
"Delicious!" he exclaimed, giving back the empty pot. "Now we know you are definitely one of us," the crocodiles said. So they allowed Anansi to sleep in their hole with them for the night. "Tomorrow morning I'll tell you the story of my life," said Anansi as they fell asleep.
Early the next morning, before first light, Anansi woke up one of the crocodiles. "I want to go and fetch my wife and children from across the river, so that they can help me tell my story. Will you help me before the others wake up?" he asked the crocodile.
The crocodile was grumpy at being woken up so early. "Please help me! You swim much faster than I do," Anansi said. The crocodile agreed, and Anansi rode on his back to the bank of the river. He climbed off quickly. "I'll be back soon! Don't go away!" Anansi said, as he disappeared through the grass.
As far as we know, the crocodile is waiting for him still, with just his long snout and his beady eyes above the surface of the river.
Long ago Lions did not have mane.So, Lions and Lionesses looked alike.
One day, a lion was hungry.He looked for food everywhere but did not find any food that day.He was very tired.He sat under an olive tree to rest for a while.
It was a windy day and one of the olives dropped down from the tree.It fell 'plop' on the lion's head, split open and rolled down.Lion was too hungry, he saw the olive and ate it up.
Wind blew harder, Olives kept plopping on the lion's head, rolled down and into his mouth.
Suddenly the lion saw a rabbit.He was still quite hungry and chased the rabbit.Rabbit ran for its dear life.
There was a patch of dry grass land nearby.Rabbit dived into the patch and ran zig-zag.Lion followed it, keeping his head down to spot the rabbit.Rabbit found a hole and went in for safety.
Lion couldn't find rabbit and came out of the patch, feeling exhausted.But oh! oh!.... what was there on his head?Lion felt something stuck up there. What?
Yes! the dry grass!Remember, olives plopping onto lion's head?The olives are very sticky inside. As if a tiny round bottle of glue!Lion didn't realise the olive glue was spreading on his head while plopping on.
And of course! the dry grass got stuck all over his head.Lion went straight to a water hole and had a look.Awww Awww Awww! He liked his new look!How splendid!
He showed his new look to all his friends, they loved it.From that day onward lions started keeping the hairy head look.And after many many years, they really grew hair over their heads.This hair is what we call Lion's Mane.
When we go walking and the road is long, we’ll walk together singing a song.
I am with you and you are with me. A journey is fun with our family.
I’ll keep you cosy like a mother hen. She keeps her chicks warm under her wing.
If the rain starts to fall down from the sky, like that good hat I’ll keep your face dry.
If storm clouds get angry and grumble and moan, be brave, why cry? You’re not alone.
We’re walking together so we never get bored. Look up! Look around! See where we’ve explored!
If you see something that’s funny to see, I don’t want to miss it. Please share it with me!
If your feet start to hurt from the distance we’ve passed, don’t worry, we’ve made it! Here’s the clinic at last.
We all need to check our throat, lungs and ears. Get strong as you grow, it’s no reason for tears.
Do you think it’s scary? Here, hold my hand. She’ll check your blood pressure with this clever armband.
They give us our medicine, tell us what we should know, to keep us all healthy. Now back home we go.
It’s okay to be tired, there’s so much we’ve seen. Now it’s your bedtime. Sleep well and sweet dreams.
I have a friend. She lives in my house.
When I am happy, so is she.
When I cry, she cries too.
But I cannot hear her voice. My friend lives inside the mirror.
“Come out,” I tell her, “we will play.” She does not come out.
I am not happy. I go to sleep.
She comes out of the mirror in my sleep! And we have fun.
We play, we run, we shout and scream together.
When I talk to her, she also talks to me.
In the morning, my friend will go back into the mirror.
But I don't mind at all. We will play again in my dreams!
Yellow butterfly on the sand.
Yellow plastic drum in the house.
Yellow horse in the street.
Yellow truck in the city.
Yellow bowl on the ground.
Yellow flowers in a bucket.
Yellow trolley in the lane.
Yellow slide in the park.
Yellow house on the corner.
Yellow Africa on my head.
And where do we all live? In Africa.
I can swim with it.
I can dance with it.
I can swing with it.
I can get eats using my body.
I can skip with it.
I can bath my doll with it.
I can make mats with it.
I can move with it but i can not fly with it.
A long time ago,  three girls went out to collect wood.
It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.
Suddenly,  they realised that it was late. They hurried back to the village.
When they were nearly home,  Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! "Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.
Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. But,  she got lost in the dark.
In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.
To her surprise,  a dog opened the door and said,  "What do you want?" "I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. "Come in,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.
The dog said,  "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. "Cook,  or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.
Then the dog said,  "Make the bed for me!" Nozibele answered,  "I've never made a bed for a dog." "Make the bed,  or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.
Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. Then one day the dog said,  "Nozibele,  today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house,  cook the food and wash my things before I come back."
As soon as the dog had gone,  Nozibele took three hairs from her head. She put one hair under the bed,  one behind the door,  and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.
When the dog came back,  he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele,  where are you?" he shouted. "I'm here,  under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here,  behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here,  in the kraal," said the third hair.
The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.
She is called a shesimply because she was produced by a she
in the morning,she is a baby,a very beautiful baby
in the noon,she is a girl,a nice looking girl
in the evening,she is a lady,a wonderful lady
That is a woman,the best of God's creation
There was a man called Lodipo. He lived with his two wives, Akai and Akitela.
Lodipo's first wife, Akai, was the only one who helped his blind mother.
One day, Lodipo's younger wife, Akitela, said, "Let us move away to a safer place." The place where they lived was constantly attacked by cattle raiders. Akitela felt unsafe.
Lodipo told Akitela that his blind mother did not want to move. Akitela insisted that they should move, and leave Lodipos' mother behind. "If we don't move away from here, I will return to my parents," Akitela cried to Lodipo.
Lodipo loved Akitela very much so he gave in to her demands. They prepared to leave. The first wife, Akai, watched all this happening with confusion.
Lodipo's blind mother sat on a goat skin under a tree. She was unaware of what was going on. "How can we leave her on her own?" Akai wondered to herself.
Lodipo and his wives loaded all their belongings on their two camels. They left quietly without even saying goodbye to the old woman. Akai was crying because she was sad to leave her mother-in-law all alone.
Immediately after Lodipo and his wives had left,  raiders attacked the place.
The raiders asked the old woman to tell them where her son went. "We are going after him to kill him," they told her. She pleaded, "Don't kill the first wife and her children." She also asked them to get back her ram, which Lodipo took with him.
The warriors followed Lodipo. Just as he was settling down in the new place, they caught up with him. They captured him and his young wife.
The first wife, Akai, went back to her mother-in-law with the ram. The two lived together happily.
One day, Anansi the spider picked up some yams in his garden. They were very beautiful and very good yams.He cooked them carefully on the fire. Then he sat down to eat them.
As Anansi was about to eat the first bite, he heard someone knock on the door. "Oh no !" Anansi thought. "Who could it be?" But he opened the door. It was Turtle who looked very tired. "Anansi, please let me in. I've walked so far today and I'm so tired and hungry," Turtle said. So what could Anansi do except let him in?
Anansi was too selfish to share his beautiful and good yams with anyone. So he came up with a nasty plan.As Turtle sat down at the table and started reaching out to grab some yams, Anansi shouted at him, "Turtle, your hands are all dirty! You can't eat with your hands all dirty! Go wash them."Turtle's hands were really dirty. So he crawled gently towards the river, washed his hands and then crawled back to the table.
But meanwhile, Anansi had started swallowing the yams. When Turtle returned, he saw that the yams were gone.Turtle looked at Anansi. "Thank you for inviting me to dinner. If you ever come near my house, come see me and let me make this dinner for you," he told him. And Turtle started crawling slowly towards his house.
After some time, Anansi began to think more and more about the free dinner promised by Turtle. So one day he went to visit.Anansi arrived at Turtle's house at dinner time as the sun was setting over the river. Turtle was lying on a rock in the sun, warming himself like turtles do.When Turtle saw Anansi, he said, "Hello, Anansi, did you come to eat with me?"And Anansi replied, "Yes, that would be very nice, thank you." He was getting hungrier and hungrier.
So Turtle dived to the bottom of the river to set the table for dinner and get everything ready. Anansi waited on the rocks on the bank.Soon Turtle came swimming back and said, "Oh Anansi, it's ready now, come have dinner with me."And Turtle dived again and started eating the green leaves prepared for dinner.
Anansi tried to dive to the bottom of the river, but it was a spider, not a turtle, and he couldn't dive that deep. He always came to the surface.He tried to jump into the river, he tried to dive, but nothing helped. He couldn't come down to eat that dinner.
Finally, Anansi had an idea. He put many stones in his coat pockets and was heavy enough to sink to the bottom of the river. How clever he was!He saw Turtle's table, full of juicy green leaves and lots of other delicious foods. Anansi's mouth was watering.
But just as Anansi grabbed some of that delicious food, Turtle stopped him. "Anansi, aren't you going to dinner with your coat on? We don't do that at home."Anansi, without thinking, replied, "Oh, of course you're right, Turtle, what was I thinking?" He took off his coat.
But without the stones in his pockets to hold him down, Anansi immediately rose to the surface of the river and found himself out of the water. Anansi sadly put her head in the water and watched Turtle eat all the delicious food!
Goat, Dog and Cow were great friends.One day they went on a journey in a taxi.
They reached the end of their journey.The driver asked them to pay their fares.Cow paid her fare.
Dog paid extra, because he did not have the correct money.
The driver was about to give Dog his change.Suddenly Goat ran away without paying.
The driver was very annoyed.He drove away without giving Dog his change.
That is why, even today, Dog runs towards a car to peep inside.He is looking for the driver who owes him change.
Goat runs away from the sound of a car.She is afraid she will be arrested for not paying her fare.
Cow is not bothered by cars.Cow takes her time crossing the road.She knows she paid her fare in full.
In my home village,  there is a trader called Dembe.
Dembe has a big shop in the village.
The shop sells flour,  sugar,  rice,  beans,  and many more things.
Dembe and his wife have three children. The children help in the shop during the holidays.
Each day,  Dembe adds up the money they earned.
Dembe has a business book. In the book he writes the amount they earn each day. He also writes what they spend to buy things for the shop.
Dembe and his wife can afford a big house and a car.
They also keep cows,  chickens and rabbits.
This family has a good life. One day,  the children will take over the shop. But first they will finish school.
One elephant isgoing to drink water.
Two giraffes are going to drink water.
Three buffaloesand four birds are also going to drink water.
Five antelopes and warthogs are walking to the water.
Seven zebras are running to the water.
Eight frogs and nine fish are swimming in the water.
One lion roars. He also wants to drink. Who is afraid of the lion?
One elephant is drinking water with the lion.
I am happiest among the big trees of a forest.Flying snakes scare me – they might gobble me up!I am a flying lizard.Where am I?
I am shy and quick-footed.Guess what? I eat my own potty!I am a black-naped hare.Where am I?
I have a very small body and really long legs.My tail looks like it’s split down the middle.I am a two-tailed spider.Where am I?
I am hidden among leaf litter.My wings have a special pattern!I am a moth.Where am I?
I spend all my life on trees in gardens.When tiny insects come near me, I leap forward and eat them up!I am a bark gecko.Where am I?
I love eating juicy, green leaves.Watch out for an odd-shaped leaf – that might just be me!I am a grasshopper.Where am I?
I have eight legs but I don't spin webs.The flower I live in is the same colour as me!I am a crab spider.Where am I?
I can sit still for hours on end.Listen for my chirps, mostly during dawn or dusk!I am a nightjar.Where am I?
I hold up my front legs in a fold, like I am praying.Look for a swaying movement and you will know it's me.I am a praying mantis.Where am I?
I spend a lot of time near water.When you hear us call "drong drowng",you know the monsoon has arrived!I am a bullfrog.Where am I?
My name is Bongiwe. I live in a town called Mpophomeni in KwaZulu-Natal.
I have a small dog called Scruffy.
After school on Fridays, Scruffy and I go to Funda Nenja classes with lots of other children and their dogs.
Funda Nenja means learning with the dog in isiZulu.
Funda Nenja teaches us how to care for our dogs in a kind and gentle way.
Funda Nenja teaches the dogs how to jump over logs and run through tunnels.
Scruffy and the other dogs enjoy their happy times together.
I love Scruffy and Scruffy loves me.
There was a village near a lake.There lived a young girl. Her name was Atieno.
Atieno's father was a famous fisherman. He had his own little fishing canoe. Atieno enjoyed going fishing with her father.
Atieno loved to watch the boys play football. "Let me play with you," she begged them one day. The boys laughed at her, "Go and play hide and seek with girls. "
Girls said to Atieno, "Your legs are too long." Atieno was sad. Each morning, Atieno danced alone with the sun.The sun became her friend.
One day, the sun did not rise. Cocks did not crow. Birds did not sing. Children did not go to school. Even her father did not go fishing.Atieno was sad. "Where is my friend, the sun? Why is it so dark today?"
Atieno told the other children how sad she was. But they laughed at her, "Perhaps your friend the sun, is dead. Or perhaps it ran away from you."Atieno said, "The sun is my friend. It cannot die."
Atieno was so sad that she ran to the house. She kicked her brother's ball very hard.
Atieno thought, "I will play with this ball until my friend, the sun returns." She picked up the ball and ran out with it.
Atieno put the ball on the ground. She thought, "I can play just like those boys." She kicked the ball hard. It went up and up into the cloudy sky.
Everybody stared up. The ball disappeared into the thick clouds. There was total silence.
Suddenly, the thick clouds cleared. The sun appeared. Life returned to the village once again. Everybody prepared to do what they always did.
Atieno could not believe that the sun was back in the village. But most of all, the sun was back in her life. She told the children, "My friend, the sun is back!"
Once there was a young man called Kumbana.
When he was 25,  he fell in love with a girl called Zangane.
They were together for 3 years,  but he didn't have enough money to marry her.
Then one day she found she was pregnant,  because they didn't use protection.
A little girl was born,  and they called her Kheri.
But Kumbana was still studying,  and Zangane had a job in a town far away,  so they had to live apart.
After a while,  Zangane found a new boyfriend. He came to live with her and the little girl.
Kumbana was heart-broken. He cried and cried because he was separated from his daughter.
Time went on,  and Kumbana found a new girlfriend too. They lived together,  but they did not have any children.
Now Kheri did not like her new father at all. She was very unhappy,  and he used to beat her.
So when she was 12,  her mother decided to send her back to live with her real father.
Then Kumbana and Kheri were both happy again.
Once upon a time, there lived a man who had plenty of everything – a large fertile farm, with cattle, sheep, and goats. But, as he grew old, he grew sad, because one thing was missing. He did not have a wife.
Standing under a tree one day, he had a brilliant idea.If he couldn't find a wife, perhaps he could make one?
So he set to work to shape a beautiful woman from a strong branch of the tree. When he had finished making the statue, he touched her eyes, and they opened. He blew gently on her, and she came alive.
She was truly the most beautiful woman he had ever seen. He knelt before her, and asked her to be his wife.
He gave her a colourful apron, beads, and a head ring, the sign of a married woman. And he built her a house with the mud and grass that used to lie at the foot of her trunk. "Only one thing I beg of you," he said to his wife. "Never tell anyone where you come from."
But before long, the young men from a neighbouring village began talking among themselves. "How can such an old man have such a beautiful young wife?" So they decided to steal her and take her to their own kraal.
The old man was heartbroken. He felt he could not live without her. But then he thought, "Perhaps if I have something of hers, I would not feel so sad?" So he sent his doves to find her, to sing to her, and to bring back something of hers to him.
When they found her, they sang to her in the language of birds. "Tree woman, tree woman. More beautiful than any other. Your husband has sent us. To bring back your apron!"
She gave them her apron, and they flew over the hill, over the river, back to her husband. He held the apron to his face, and was comforted for a little while.
But his longing did not go away. So again he sent his doves to sing to her:Tree woman, tree woman! More beautiful than any otherYour husband has sent us To bring back your head ring! And back they flew with the head ring, the sign of a married woman.
He held the head ring and sighed for his wife, far away in the kraal of other people. He called his doves again. He told them to go to her and sing: Tree woman, tree woman More beautiful than any other Your husband has sent us To bring back your life!
So away they went the third time. They perched on her shoulders. As they sang, each bird pecked out an eye. Immediately she turned again into a statue. Her feet and arms fell away. Then her head. And she fell to the ground.
Her husband slowly rolled her wooden trunk to the river. He stood her up with her roots in the water. Nourished by sun and soil, she grew leaves again.
And when the wind blows, the leaves sigh. Just as a woman does when she longs for her husband.
Once upon a time,  the animals decided to have a party. But it was not for all of them. It was only for the animals that had horns.
The rabbit was getting ready for the party. But then he found out that the party was not for everyone. It was just for animals with horns.
The rabbit went somewhere and got some horns. Then he put them on his head and went to the party.
During the party the rabbit ate and drank and danced.
This made him tired and he fell down in the sun. But while the rabbit was sleeping,  the horns fell off!
Then all the animals discovered that the rabbit was not the kind of animal they wanted. So they pulled his ears till they got bigger and bigger.
Then they ran away. And that's the reason why rabbits have big ears!
My brother  reads a School book
My mother reads a Bible.
My sister reads a recipes book
My uncle reads a newspaper
My grandmother reads a magazine
My follower reads a picture book
This is the book i read
In a shortest period possible i will be able to read any kind of book
This is cow. Cow is cool!
By day,  it is an ordinary cow.
Flying a kite.
Kicking a ball.
By night,  a supercow!
Saving lives.
And fighting crime.
But if you close your eyes really tight,  and make a wish.
Cow might come to visit you too!
The end.
Long time ago, in the village of Elunyiko, there lived a man called Ndonga and his wife called Namukhaywa. They had six children. All of them were girls.
When Namukhaywa was pregnant with her seventh child, Ndonga warned her, "If you give birth to another girl, I will leave you. But if you give me a baby boy, I will hold a big party for you!"
When it was time to give birth, Namukhaywa went to the traditional midwife. Would the child be a girl or a boy?
It was a boy AND a girl – twins! She called the boy Mukhwana, and the girl she called Mulongo. As she looked at Mukhwana, she was very happy. But as she looked at Mulongo, she felt sad. She felt that there was only one thing she could do.
Namukhaywa left Mulongo in the care of the midwife and took Mukhwana home to her husband.
She proudly showed Ndonga the baby boy. He was very happy and called all the villagers to celebrate the birth of his son.
Mukhwana grew up to be a fine young man. And Mulongo grew up to be a fine young woman.
One day, while minding his father's cattle, Mukhwana saw a very beautiful girl. "This is the girl I want to marry," he said to himself.
But when he asked her to marry him, she sang this song: Mukhwana wefwe, Mukhwana. So yakhupa omunwa, Mukhwana. Nebebula omukhana, Mukhwana. Barulaka khulwanda, Mukhwana. Nebebula omusiani, Mukhwana. Barera mungo muno, Mukhwana. Iyeyi yakwa, Mukhwana. Iyindi yakwa, Mukhwana.
This happened again and again. Mukhwana did not know what to do. He went to his mother, Namukhaywa. "I have found a beautiful girl," he said. "And I want to marry her. But every time I ask her, she sings the same song."
To his surprise, Namukhaywa said, "What the girl is singing about is true. That is your sister. You were born twins. Your father wanted a son, not a daughter. So I left your baby sister with the midwife, and brought you home to your father."
When Mukhwana told his father the story, he saw that he had been wrong. He called Namukhaywa and together they went to the midwife to fetch Mulongo.
When Mulongo arrived home, her father and the village elders slaughtered a goat and performed the traditional ceremony for re-uniting Mulongo and her seven siblings.
A year later, Mulongo was married to the son of the rich king of that village. She brought a lot of wealth and happiness to her family.
Kate has a thing in her head. How will they remove it?
It makes her tired. It pains her. It makes her feel heavy.
She can't eat. She can't drink. She is not as jolly as before.
The doctor sees a swelling in her head and says, "There is a tumour in your brain."
"We have to remove it from your brain right now. We have to remove it now!" the doctor says.
They bring a stretcher.
They arrange the surgical blades.
They inject her with syringes.
They cut open Kate's head.
They remove the brain.
They cut out the tumour.
They return the brain to the skull. Then they stitch the head back together again.
Does Kate feel everything they do? No! Kate is in heaven. She does not feel. She does not eat. She does not think. For 24 hours!
Then she comes back to life!
Now she is well. Like a new born baby.
We are all happy for our friend Kate, who tasted heaven.
In a village on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa,  a little girl worked in the fields with her mother. Her name was Wangari.
Wangari loved being outside. In her family's food garden she broke up the soil with her machete. She pressed tiny seeds into the warm earth.
Her favourite time of day was just after sunset. When it got too dark to see the plants,  Wangari knew it was time to go home. She would follow the narrow paths through the fields,  crossing rivers as she went.
Wangari was a clever child and couldn't wait to go to school. But her mother and father wanted her to stay and help them at home. When she was seven years old,  her big brother persuaded her parents to let her go to school.
She liked to learn! Wangari learnt more and more with every book she read. She did so well at school that she was invited to study in the United States of America. Wangari was excited! She wanted to know more about the world.
At the American university Wangari learnt many new things. She studied plants and how they grow. And she remembered how she grew: playing games with her brothers in the shade of the trees in the beautiful Kenyan forests.
The more she learnt,  the more she realised that she loved the people of Kenya. She wanted them to be happy and free. The more she learnt,  the more she remembered her African home.
When she had finished her studies,  she returned to Kenya. But her country had changed. Huge farms stretched across the land. Women had no wood to make cooking fires. The people were poor and the children were hungry.
Wangari knew what to do. She taught the women how to plant trees from seeds. The women sold the trees and used the money to look after their families. The women were very happy. Wangari had helped them to feel powerful and strong.
As time passed,  the new trees grew into forests,  and the rivers started flowing again. Wangari's message spread across Africa. Today,  millions of trees have grown from Wangari's seeds.
Wangari had worked hard. People all over the world took notice,  and gave her a famous prize. It is called the Nobel Peace Prize,  and she was the first African woman ever to receive it.
Wangari died in 2011,  but we can think of her every time we see a beautiful tree.
Tom carries a tray of ripe bananas.
Tom goes to the market to sell bananas.
People at the market are buying fruit.
But no one is buying Tom's bananas. They prefer to buy fruit from women.
"In our community,  only women sell fruit," people say. "What kind of a man is this?" people ask.
But Tom does not give up. He calls,  "Buy my bananas! Buy my sweet ripe bananas!"
One woman picks up a bunch of bananas from the tray. She looks at the bananas carefully.
The woman buys the bananas.
More people come to the stall. They buy Tom's bananas and eat them.
Soon,  the tray is empty. Tom counts the money he earned.
Then Tom buys soap,  sugar,  and bread. He puts the things in his tray.
Tom balances the tray on his head and goes home.
Mother and father left their baby with their older children.
The older children played and forgot about the baby.
One day, cranes came across the crying baby.
They lifted the baby in its blanket and flew away.
The mother saw four cranes flying away with her baby.
The cranes looked after the baby.
While the cranes were away, a frog swallowed the baby!
For three flies, the frog returned the baby to its parents.
Flying across the morning sky,Are birds in a hungry mood.Spot the one who has caught,A yummy worm for its food!
Butterflies of different colours,Are flitting flower to flower.But there’s one that stands out,Because it’s one colour all over.
A cheerful bunch of kites,Is merrily hopping about.But one’s not quite the same,Can you find the odd one out?
Big and small squares,Are shapes you see everywhere.There’s one grill that’s different,Where is it hidden, here or there?
Look among the green leaves,Of this big, old tree.There’s a branch with a speck of colour,Wherever can it be?
Planes flying across the sky,Leave behind a straight trail.But one of them is rather odd,And instead makes a curvy tail.
A line of chattering birds,Are sitting above, can you see?But one likes to be quiet,Whichever could it be?
A flock of white clouds,Gleams on a bright summer day.But one decides to be rainy,And doesn’t care what the others say.
A long day is done,And the night has just begun.Of all the streetlights,Find one that shines like the sun.
Bats sleep when the sun is out,And wake when it's night.Can you find the odd one,Who is still sleeping tight?
Outer space has many planets,Shiny and brightly lit.Spot one that’s unique,Because it has a ring around it.
This is Norah.Norah's doll is called Sellah.
Norah loves Sellah very much. She plays and sleeps with Sellah every night.
One day, Norah was very worried because she could not find Sellah.
Norah's mother had washed Sellah.
Norah went to her mother crying, "I can't find Sellah."
Before Norah slept, her mother brought Sellah to her.
Norah jumped out of bed and danced with Sellah.
Norah hugged her mother and thanked her for cleaning Sellah.
Once upon a time there was a husband and wife with children. The mother prepared food for the family each day. She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.
The father would divide the meat. He would say to the eldest child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."
Then he would say to the next child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older." Each small portion became even smaller.  It went like this for all the children. The youngest child got a tiny piece of meat.
The father kept the big pieces of meat for himself and his wife. The children were quiet and ate their food.
Years passed and the children grew up. The parents grew old. They became weak. The children looked after their old mother and father.
One day at meal time, the eldest child served the meat,  as usual. But this time she gave only a tiny piece to her father and a tiny piece to her mother.
She said to her parents, "You ate yours, now it is our time. We are old enough."  She served most of the meat to her brothers and sisters.
The father remembered what he did while his children were young. Mother and father agreed that it was not the right thing to do. They asked for forgiveness. The children promised that they would not repeat this mistake with their own children.
The day that we’re waiting for is coming. It’s going to be Chiefs versus Aces on this very field. Come and watch! Come with your vuvuzela!
“Chiefs, the cup must come to sleep at home,” said Coach. “I want us to work together as a team to defeat the Aces. We must attack cleverly, defend well, and pass to each other.”
Soon we were practising hard. “Pass the ball, pass it, Portia Modise!”“Defend, defend, Jomo!”“There it is, there it is, into the goals!”Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! sounded the vuvuzela.
“You played wonderfully, my beautiful Chiefs!You attacked cleverly, you defended well, and you passed to each other. You played as a real team!”
“High five to all of you! Well done!” said Coach.
We went home really tired, but the practice was good.“When is the real match, Coach?” we asked.
Finally the day came. “Halala Chiefs, halala! It’s going to be a good game. The cup is ours!” said Coach. Po-o-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o! Po-o-o-o-o! sounded the vuvuzela.
And then there was a surprise. “What beautiful kit!  Thank you, Coach. We play the best, and now we also look the best!”
Where are you going my little goat?
I am going to the market to buy a new coat.
"A coat for a goat?" asked the chicken.
"Can a goat have a coat?" asked the man.
Everyone will laugh at a goat with a coat!
But my little goat likes her new coat. Goodbye goat!
A crocodile has big teeth.
A lion has big teeth as well.
A cow has strong teeth.
Birds do not have teeth.
Rats have big front teeth.
Sharks have sharp teeth.
I used to have a lot of teeth.
But now I don't have many.
This is Cat.This is Dog.
Cat and Dog live in a house. A house with a door. A house with a roof.
Cat and Dog have a ball. The ball is red and blue and green.
Cat and Dog play with the ball. Cat throws the ball to Dog.Dog catches the ball. Dog throws the ball to Cat. Cat catches the ball.
Then Cat throws the ball very high.Oh! oh!
The ball is on the roof. The ball is on the roof of the house.
Cat and Dog can see the ball. Cat and Dog cannot get to the ball.
Cat and Dog cry. Then Elephant comes by.
Elephant is big. Elephant can see the ball. Elephant can get to the ball. Elephant gets the ball from the roof. Elephant takes the ball from the roof of the house.
Elephant gives the ball to Cat and Dog. Cat and Dog smile. Elephant smiles. Cat and Dog and Elephant smile.
Cat and Dog and Elephant play with the ball.Cat throws the ball to Dog. Dog catches the ball. Dog throws the ball to Elephant. Elephant catches the ball. Elephant throws the ball to Cat. Cat catches the ball.
Bye bye Cat.Bye bye Dog. Bye bye Elephant.
This is Norah. Norah's doll is called Sellah.
Norah loves Sellah very much.  She plays and sleeps with Sellah every night.
One day,  Norah was very worried because she could not find Sellah.
Norah's mother had washed Sellah.
Norah went to her mother crying,  "I can't find Sellah."
Before Norah slept,  her mother brought Sellah to her.
Norah jumped out of bed and danced with Sellah.
Norah hugged her mother and thanked her for cleaning Sellah.
“I can’t lift you up, Shanu!” says Ammi. “You are too big!”
“You can’t walk to school alone, Shanu!” says Abbu. “You are too small!”
“You can’t sleep in the baby’s cot, Shanu!” says Dadu. “You are too big!”
“You can’t carry the baby to the park, Shanu!” says Dadi. “You are too small!”
Shanu is puzzled. Too big! Too small! How can she be too big andtoo small all at once?
Too big to wear her old pink frock.Too small to make dosas at the stove.
Too big to climb up on Dadu’s back?Too smallto carry the baby on hers?
“What am I the right size for?” Shanu wonders.
“You are just big enough to take me for my morning walks,” says Dadu.
“And you are just small enough for me to tell stories to,” says Dadi.
“And you will always, always be the perfect size...for this!" all say, and give her a warm, wonderful hug.
Why don't we cruise,
Times square in Kampala,
Enjoy the jam,
I'm not immune
To your deft charm
In one stalled car
I'd like to take
You as  you are
Water is life.
We drink water.
Animals drink water.
Plants use water to grow.
Crocodiles live in water.
We swim in water.
We wash our hands with water.
We wash clothes with water.
Water is life.
"Ammachi! Ammachi! Could we makecoconut barfi today?" Sooraj asked his grandmother."PLEEEEEAASE?"
"Hee hee hee! Only if you help me make it, eh?" replied Ammachi."YAY!"
"Ready?" shouted Sooraj."Ready!" said Ammachi.
"We’ll only pick the ripe ones, okay?                             The ones that are brown all over...                                Watch out! Here they come!"                        WHOOOSH... WHUMP!
"Now to get the husk off…"                                        POTCH! CRAANKK!
Sooraj’sstomach went: "GRRRRRR!" Ammachigiggled.
"Then we  crACK                                             the shell… like THIS!"                                                                                                          KHATAK!
"And grrrrrraaaaate thefrrrrrrrruuuit!"
"Toss it into the pan with all theother ingredients…" "It smells SO good, Ammachi!"
"Then we pour it all out on to atray… Wait for it to cool, baba!"
"Now cut it into                         neat little slices…"                                            SQUEAK                                            SQUEAK
"YIPPEE! Our coconut barfi is ready to be eaten!"                                                                     "YUM YUM YUM!"
Ammachi's barfi was made using SIMPLE MACHINES!  Simplemachines make it easier to do work. There are six kinds of simple machines: 1. Inclinedplane 2. Lever 3. Wheeland Axle
Small Bird was a small bird. He was very small and very birdy.
Small Bird lived in a beautiful house with the Giant. Small Bird loved the Giant very much. She was a kind Giant. She gave Small Bird lots of toys.
Small Bird was sad when the Giant wasn’t around.
So one day Small Bird went to go find the Giant.
Small Bird flew up and up until he could see the whole world. He wanted to find the Giant. Where would he land?
Small Bird landed in a huge forest, filled withtrees and flowers and treasure. Small Bird loved playing with the shiny jewels!But where was the Giant?
Small Bird walked into a vast field of snow. The snow was white and soft. Small Bird loved rolling around on the cool ground.But where was the Giant?
This time, Small Bird flew even higher into the sky. He flew among the stars and galaxies! He saw the moon! He saw a comet! But where was the Giant?
From way up high, with his sharp birdy eyes, Small Bird saw something!What could it be?
Small Bird dived down, down, down.Where would he land?
Small Bird landed right in the Giant’s hands! He was so happy to see her. “I love you, Giant!” he shrieked.
The Giant held Small Bird close to her.“I love you too,” the Giant said.
Children like playing football.
Some play with water.
Farah and Juma like running.
Some children like to play with their pet.
Emy likes to jump.
Some like swimming.
Zara and Izzo feed chickens.They play with them too.
Some children like to play wedding games.
Nina and Malaika like to play with dolls.
Others dance together.
Some children just like to watch others.
What about you? What do you like doing?
Mother is on a holiday today. She was sitting and reading a book. Even Anil was on a holiday. He wanted to do something or the other. "Mama, what is there in the blue trunk? I want to see!" Said Anil."Anil, let's see later" replied the mother.
Anil brought a stool and kept in on the chair and climbed to bring down the blue trunk."No, no! no! Anil, whatever more trunks are on top of that will all fall on our heads!"  Said the mother.
Anil became very angry. He was angry on his mother too.
" Let's go to the market and let's buy you something," said the mother.
Even after going to the market Anil was very angry. "I want that" he kept showing his finger while looking at the orange."No, no! Not that! All the fruits will fall down!" Said the fruit vendor.
"I want that book" said Anil."No, no! Not that! Take this." Said the shopkeeper.
"I want that!" Anil said it in the interest of taking one samosa. "No, no! Not that! All my samosa's will fall down!" Said the sweet vendor.
"I want that!" said Anil. "No, no! Not that! Don't even touch it! The flowers will dry up." Said the flower vendor.
Now Anil started to cry loudly.Everyone was looking at Anil.
"I want that!  It is black!", Said the mother.Anil suddenly stopped to cry.Mother, no, no! Not that!" Said Anil.
Let's take the colour of the mud.!" Said Anil. Anil slowly picked up a mud color puppy."Mother, I am very angry on you! All the puppies would have fallen down!"Mother laughed. Even Anil was laughing. Now then he wasn't angry at all.
Mr. cat, Mr. cat, Mr. cat, Mr. cat
where is my sweet milk Mr. cat?
Where is my delicious meat Mr. cat?
Mr. cat, Mr. cat, Mr. cat, Mr. cat
You are little lousy mischievous animal Mr. cat
Mr. cat, Mr. cat, Mr. cat, Mr cat
Yellow or Brown man  Fingers always smelling of money.
My father works all day and never misses a day.
His work seems easy, my father is now me.
My father had a khaki suit, the color of the soil.
My father stored old receipts and business cards, to pull shame out of his pockets.
I am becoming my father.  Yellow or Brown man  Fingers always smelling of money.
Long time ago,  there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark,  they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said,  "I am a louse. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu."
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate,  drank,  and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left,  they had a bad thought. They said,  "No,  it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse."  Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone,  and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
As I was moving in Buŋaanga village I found a fat hornbill.
When I struck it with a catapult, it shouted "ŋaa, ŋaa, ŋa!"
The hornbill flew into the air. But I ran after it through the grass.
Until it perched on a dead tree. Then I shot it again. This time it fell to the ground.
I picked up the hornbill.
And I gave it to Hiryagaana: one who eats whatever he finds. He happily received the hornbill.
The head of the hornbill was very big and as hard as a machete.
The bird had fat like that of a sheep. It was so appetising!
It's not easy to find a hornbill without planning. At night, hornbills roost on dry branches. A person eats what he likes. That is why Hiryagaana eats hornbills.
I had never worn shoes before. When I saw children wearing nice shoes, I would look at them with longing.
My mother would say, "You will have many pairs in the future, just wait!" Sometimes I did not believe her. "When is the future?" I asked her one day.
Time passed and it was nearly Christmas. Everybody was busy going to the market and coming back with bags of new things. "Mother, are we going to the market?" I asked her.
The day before Christmas, my mother woke me up earlier than usual. She asked me to fetch the big shopping basket she always carried to the market.
At the open-air market there, were many parents with their children. They were buying new clothes and stocking up on food.
We went straight to where there were many different types of shoes. My eyes were wide with amazement. I gaped at row after row of neatly arranged shoes.
After trying on many pairs, I settled for black lace-up shoes. At home that night, I couldn't sleep. I was so excited thinking of how I would wear my new shoes and show off to every child in the village.
After a while, I got out of bed and put on the shoes. I walked slowly around the room and then put the shoes back into the box. I lay down again, but I couldn't sleep.
I got up and tried on the shoes a second time. I strutted around the room for a while and then put them back.
I lay down once more and tried to sleep. But I got up a third time. I put on the shoes and jumped around the room. Then I felt tired. I decided to get back into bed.
The following morning, I was woken by my mother. "What is this I see?" she asked.
I was wearing my new shoes in bed!
Almost everyone calls me Daisy   The people that knew me in the early    stages of life call me Kisaakye Daisy
Thew few that claim to know me call me     Daisy KIsaakye Nabbumba
It takes more than a name to know a person.  That is why some people choose nicknames for their friends.
But to me, all that matters is calling me by my name    or my nickname and I respond with a smile.
Almost everyone knows that I am a girl.  Some think that I am a humble girl.  Few think that I am a proud girl.
﻿   My friends know that I am an out going and understanding, caring girl.
But to me, all that matters is being the best  girl i can be to everyone, those that i know and those that i don't know.
She wets the bed everyday, IreneShe jumps through the windows, Irene
She moves left and right recklessly, IreneShe paints her lips red and rolls her eyes beautifully, Irene
She makes noise all day and night long, IreneShe disorganizes the house painting it with various colors, Irene
She sits in the dirt and soils her clothes, IreneShe plays with dirty bottles, tins and destroys the dolls, Irene
She hides behind the flowers and kneels on them, IreneShe decorates the puppy and plays with it, Irene
Indeed Irene is a naughty girl
Irene the naughty girl!
They are all children,although different,all from families though different,different with the difference in almost everything
but why the difference,to the poor ones,they never sleep peacefullyalways on the run
they barely eat and the sight of food almost makes them die,die of happiness,worried of tomorrow
yet the rich child has plenty in stockhunger is just newsalways with caretakers to feed them
they sleep comfortably,not even the sound of rain,windcan be a hinderance
and the poor one is always peeping at the comfort
Tears and sorrow are her only foodoh,poor child
when will you ever play with rich childrenwithout asking,are you poor or rich?
that is the poor and rich child.
It is Rani's first day at school.Her mother is holding her hand and walking her to school."I am grown up now", Rani says to her mother. "Let go my hand, let go!"Her mother holds her hand even more tightly.
There were many children reaching the school already.Some children came by bus, by car, some by rickshaw, cycle.And some came by walking, just like Rani.
Rani and her mother reached the school gate, and her mother let go off her hand.Her mother stays at the gate. Now Rani has to go inside alone.There are many new faces all around her.
She takes one step, then another. She looks back, her mother was getting smaller and smaller as she walks away. She thinks. will my mother disappear and feels scared so runs back to her.She doesn't feel so grown up and holds her mother's hand and says "Don't go away".
All the students were inside by now, Rani was the only one outside.The teacher comes out and smiles at Rani. Rani smiles back at her teacher and let go off her mother's hand. Her mother says, "Rani, I will be here when you come out."Her mother waves to her and goes away.
Rani went inside. She was now happy, her mother will be there after school!
Oh my God             We need humps in the road
We                         need humps in the streets
Hamps in the                                        west,
We need hamps on the highway
Humps in the road                                                                                         accidents are reduced
With humps in the road,                          Drivers reduce speed
When there humps in the road                                                      The road is safe to cross.
Long time ago, there were two young men who lost their cows. They looked for the cows until it was late.
As it got dark, they saw a light in a house. They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.
They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.
The voice said, "I am a louse*. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu**."* A small parasitic insect** A Southern African drink
Then the louse put on its skin and went out.
The young men ate, drank, and gave thanks. Then they left the house.
As they left, they had a bad thought. They said, "No, it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse." Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.
They went back to the house and crushed the louse. Suddenly the louse was gone, and the house disappeared! They found themselves outside in the open.
There was a dark jungle.
It was a big dark jungle. There were lots of trees and a narrow path. Many animals and birds lived here.
One day,  all the animals came together. "Did you hear?" asked Tota,  the parrot. "Yes," said Hirni,  the deer. "What?" asked Darpok,  the rabbit. "We have a school in the jungle," answered Zhoola,  the monkey. Mota,  the elephant wondered,  "Hmph?" Lamboo,  the giraffe said,  "Oh,  good!" Dheema,  the snail squealed,  "Hurry,  let's go!"
Tota,  the parrot flew ahead. Zhoola,  the monkey jumped from tree to tree. Poorakha,  the python slithered fast. "Here!" shouted Tota. "Can you read?" "It is upside down,  I think," said Zhoola hanging by the branch. Poorakha concluded,  "Hisssss. No one can read."
Soon,  all the other friends joined them. Lamboo looked over the tree. "No one here," he said. Zhoola repeated,  "No one here." Tota proposed,  "Look carefully!" Pilloo,  the little bear declared,  "I found a room!"
"I found a swing",  announced Dheema. "What are these blocks?" Darpok wanted to know. "What is this?" was Zhoola's question. Poorakha explained,  "I believe,  this is a pencil."
Moto and Lamboo found a classroom. They called the others,  "Look,  what is this?" Everyone came with school bags. They began shouting,  "Teacher! Teacher! Where is our teacher?" No one knew.
Then they heard a roar. They heard a loud roar. They heard a louder roar. Poorakha was worried. Dheema was scared. Tota hid behind the board. Lamboo and Zhoola were puzzled.
Who is this? "Hup!" said Zhoola the monkey. No one spoke. They all looked at the teacher. Up and down carefully. Then they looked at one another.
The teacher turned to write on the black board. "Jump," said Zhoola. "Fly! Said Tota. Thump,  thump,  thump ran Mota. "Run,  run run fast," screamed Dheema. "Bhagoooo," they all shouted together. When the teacher turned. There was no one in the class."
There was a spider called Anansi. Anansi was too lazy to cook his own food. Instead, he used to visit his friends and eat the delicious food they had cooked.
One day, Anansi was passing Rabbit's house when he smelled green vegetables cooking. He was very excited. Rabbit said to Anansi, “They're not quite ready yet. You can help me to wash up while we wait.” Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. I'll come back later.”
“How will I call you when they're ready?” asked Rabbit. Anansi thought for a minute. “I'll spin a web,” he said. “I'll tie one end around my leg and one end to your pot. When the greens are ready, pull on the web string. I'll come right away.” So Anansi tied the web to the pot, and walked on.
Anansi saw Monkey and his wife, cooking beans in a large pot. “Come and join us! The beans are nearly ready.” Monkey said. Anansi replied, “Sorry, I have things to do. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the beans are ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
As Anansi walked by Warthog's house, he smelled sweet potatoes. Warthog told Anansi, “My pot is full of sweet potatoes and honey! Come and share my food with me. Take this fork and help me to stir it.” Anansi replied, “I'll come back later. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the sweet potatoes areready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.”
By the time Anansi arrived at the river, each of his eight legs was tied to a pot of delicious food. Then, Anansi felt a pull on one of his legs. “Rabbit's food is ready!” Anansi thought, licking his lips.
He felt a second pull. And a third. And a fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth pull. Everyone was pulling on the web strings at the same time! “Stop! Stop!” he cried in pain, as his legs were stretched thinner and thinner. But no one could hear him.
Finally, the web strings could hold no longer. They snapped, one by one. Anansi rolled into the river to soothe his painful legs. But his legs would not return to their normal shape. Anansi was too embarrassed to go to any of his friends that day.
Thuli has short hair.
Anna has long hair.
Cathy has the longest hair.
Zama has plaited her hair.
Baba has a beard.
Zanele has combed her hair.
Thabo has cut his hair.
Themba has shaved his hair.
The old man of Koleo has just gone to town.
The wife of the old man of Koleo has just gone to town.
The son of the wife of the old man of Koleo has just gone to town.
The cousin of the son of the wife of the old man of Koleo has just gone to town.
The dog of the cousin of the son of the wife of the old man of Koleo has just gone to town.
Once up on a time, there were two friends. The one was clever, the other was stupid. The stupid man's wife was clever. The clever man's wife was stupid.
While they were chatting, the clever man said, "Your wife is clever, but you are stupid. My wife is also stupid, so she might be more compatible with you."
The stupid man asked, "Between me and you, who is stupider?" Then he said, "I am as clever as you are." "If so, let's go to a judge and I will ask you a question," replied the clever man. They agreed to go.
In front of the judge, the clever man asked, "How many stars are there in the sky? Where is the centre of the world? Answer both questions, or we will swap our wives." The judge allowed some time for the stupid man to return with the answers.
One night, the stupid man was counting the stars, sitting on the roof of his house. "What are you doing?" his wife asked him.
He replied, "My friend asked me how many stars there are in the sky, and where the centre of the earth is. Now I'm counting the stars."
"Don't worry, I will tell you the answers," said his wife. She gave her husband a sack of grain. She said, "If they ask you how many stars are in the sky, tell them it is the same as the number of grains in the sack."
Then she gave him a stick and said, "If they ask you where the centre of the world is, push the stick into the ground and tell them it is in the centre. If they complain, tell them to measure it."
The stupid man arrived with his wife's advice. First he answered, "The number of stars is the same as the number of grains in this sack." Then he pushed the stick into the ground and said, "This is the centre of the earth."
The judge was amused and asked, "Who told you this?" The stupid man replied, "My wife."    The judge continued, "Your wife is very clever, so she should be with a clever man. You will swap your wives."  Then, the judge set an appointment to swap their wives.
The stupid man told his wife, "I won, but the judge said that you are clever, and don't deserve to be with me." His wife replied, "Don't worry I have a solution to this too."
The time came for the judge to swap the wives. The clever wife gave the judge a saucepan of food as a gift. When the judge opened the saucepan, he saw a roasted chicken still with all its feathers! Shocked, he muttered, "Oh, I see, so she belongs with her stupid husband afterall!"
Mqanduli is a beautiful place close to Mthatha and has rigid buildings. There are many streets and we have many places to go in Mthatha.
Zuma has a big head and long moustache. He has big eyes. Zuma is not beautiful,  he is old. When you look at Zuma you see a killer.
Zuma wanted to ask Zahara to marry him,  but he did not know how he could talk to her. He decided to go to Zahara's house and talk with her.
Zuma asked Zahara to marry him. Zahara said,  "No! I can't marry you because you are too old and I have my own boyfriend called Amaza. I will marry him."
Zuma went to the traditional healer for medicine that would make Zahara marry him. The traditional healer said,  "I love Zahara and Amaza is the one who will marry her. So I can't do that."
Zuma didn't get medicine and he was so sad and angry because he loved Zahara too much.
Zahara didn't marry Zuma. And she never will.
Frog and Snake are friends.
Frog says,  "Come with me to visit my mother."
"Thank you," Snake says. "Who will watch our homes?"
"I will watch your homes," says Monkey.
Frog puts white ants in a bag for her mother.
Frog and Snake leave at dawn. They go into a forest.
They meet a gang of squirrels. Snake is afraid.
Frog protects her friend.
They are hungry when they get to Mother's house.
They wash and get ready to eat.
"Snake,  please sit up," says Frog.
Snake tries to sit up,  but she is not a frog.
"I cannot sit up like a frog," says Snake.
Frog will not listen.
"You do not understand me. I am going home."
Snake is annoyed. "I thought Frog was my friend."
Once upon a time, there was an old woman who lived with her three grandchildren.
Every morning they all went to work in the field. One day, one of the girls said, "Grandmother, I don't feel well today."
So, the old woman sent the child home.
When the girl got home, she saw that there was meat in the pot. She ate all the meat and then went to sleep.
The old woman and two children were tired and hungry when they returned from the field. Grandmother prepared ugali for supper, to eat with the meat she had cooked that morning.
She opened the pots to serve her grandchildren. When she opened the pot with the meat, it was empty!
"Who ate the meat?" asked Grandmother, frowning. But all three grandchildren shook their heads. "Not me," each one said.
Their grandmother tied a rope across the river. She told each of them to walk on the rope as they sang a song.
"The one that ate the meat will fall into the river, and learn to tell the truth," warned Grandmother.The first granddaughter walked quickly across the river, singing the song.
The other two grandchildren began to argue with each other. The girl said to the boy, "You go next." The boy replied, "No, you go next!"
The granddaughter who ate the meat was scared and shivering. As she stepped forward to walk on the rope, she slipped and fell into the river.
"Help! Help!" shouted the girl. Grandmother said to the other two, "She is guilty, but we must help her."
Together they pulled the frightened girl out of the river. Since that day, the old woman's grandchildren have always told the truth.
What are the seven colors of the rainbow?
1. Red
He wears a red shirt.
2. Orange
What is orange in this picture?
3. Yellow
What is yellow in this picture?
3. Green
What is green in this picture?
5. Blue
What is blue in this picture?
﻿6. Indigo
What is indigo in this picture?
7. Violet
Violet is my favorite color.What is your favorite color?
Which seven colors are there in the rainbow?
Bear likes colours.
Now, her ears are yellow.
Now, her tummy is brown.
Now, her mouth is red.
Now, her hands are blue.
Now, her back is green.
Now, her legs are pink.
Now, Bear is colourful!
Oh no! Where did all her colours go?
In the forest, the little elephant was walking with his mother and his older sister. They were walking and singing loudly. Unfortunately the little elephant squeezed his foot on a stone and he stopped and laid at the roadside.
His mother and his sister continued and did not recognized that they left him behind.He stayed down there alone, lost his way and he couldn't go anywhere.He was afraid and was crying, thinking of the dangers of the forest.
By chance, Panda was eating near the place where the Little Elephant was resting. Panda come to him, touch his head and asked: "- Come with me! in the City where all animals of the earth live."He could not refuse because he did not have a place to stay in that forest and it was far from his own City.
At his arrival in the city, everyone showed different emotions and reactions.Some felt in love with the little stranger Elephant, some were sad about him, some were angry but others were even afraid. The fear came because of the king. The king was the Lion and he was a very arrogant king.
The king Lion did not agree that the Little Elephant should stay in the city and said:"- The one who will not obey my words will go away with him. My kingdom is not for strangers but for the descendants of this place. Now, go away from this city or I will break your bones in thousand pieces."
The Little Elephant was shocked and scared. He did not have much to say and he left.But Panda, as he became his very good friend, was disturbed and felt that he can't let him be alone and to get lost.With courage and love, Panda decided to leave everything and travel with the little elephant. To start an adventure together…On the way home.
Grandma greets me.
We ran to look at grandma's cow.
I caught up with her.
I ran away from her.
Grandma got very tired.
Long,  long time ago,  animals used to speak.  There lived Hare and Hyena.
The two were very closed friends.  They did everything together including looking for food.
Hare was very clever. She gathered more food than the lazy Hyena.
Hyena was lazy but he liked eating very much. Although they hunted differently,  they put the food together.
Hare used her tricks to get food faster.   She also ate some before taking it to where Hyena was.
During the drought,  it was very hard for the two to gather enough food for themselves.
One day,  Hare woke Hyena up very early in the morning. They stood under a tree to discuss how they were going to live.
There was only one bus in Ebei's village. It was big and blue. It was very noisy.
“Tomorrow we will go to town,” said Ebei's mother. “We will buy your school uniform.”
Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. He could not sleep that night.
When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.
Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. But the bus did not come.
Other people arrived at the bus stop. They complained because the bus was late. “Where is the bus?” they asked.
Ebei was worried. “We will not be able to go to town,” he thought. “I will not be able to get my uniform.”
Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. “We will wait a bit longer,” said his mother.
Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. The bus was coming!
But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. The people did not want to get in this bus.
“Get in! Get in!” shouted the driver. “We are very late today,” he called.
Ebei and his mother got in first. Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.
Ebei looked out the window. He saw more people at the bus stop.
Even more people were running to catch the bus. But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.
“Where is the big blue bus?” asked Ebei's mother. “It broke down,” replied the driver. “We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow.”
Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. This bus was going to town!
I love water.
I enjoy playingwith water.
It is raining.
Rain gives uswater.
I enjoy playingoutside.
But it israining.
I enjoy playing out in the rain.
My hair is wetfrom playing in the rain. My father is fixing my hair.
He is so bigalways scaring the little animals on the ground
he is always looking for waysthe ways of stealing baby hens
mother hens are always protecting their babiesfrom dangerous Mr. Eagle
because he has no mercy at allonly thinking of how to eat
that is Mr. EagleA big thief of baby hens
My pet is a cat. She is called Koko. She is friendly and beautiful.
My brother Tom and I like playing with Koko. My mother likes watching us while we play with Koko.
Koko is so playful. Koko likes playing with her little sisters while her mother is asleep. I like watching Koko playing with her sisters.
We all like watching Koko playing with butterflies. Koko keeps us busy during our free time.
Everyone in our family loves Koko.  My brother bought a present for her. This made me very happy.
Koko is always clean and smart.  I feel good when I see Koko.  She likes me too.
There were many snakes near Nyare village. The biggest was Lego. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.
One day, Apiyo, Ajoh and Atieno went to fetch firewood. Grandmother said, “Be careful of Lego. Fetch firewood only.” Ajoh did not pay attention.
The girls packed some food, ropes and a sharp machete. Apiyo said, “I am the oldest, so you must listen to me.”
They talked and laughed as they walked. Suddenly, Apiyo said, “Be quiet. We are near where Lego lives.”
Atieno said, “These are Lego's golden teeth. Let us take them.” Apiyo reminded them, “Remember what grandmother told us. We must fetch only firewood.”
“Grandmother does not know anything. I will take the golden teeth,” saidAjoh. Apiyo and Atieno were not happy.
Lego came looking for his golden teeth. They were not there. Lego thought, “The one who took my teeth will know who I am!”
On their way home, the girls heard, “Hzzzzzzzz!” Lego was there with his mouth wide open, ready to swallow.
Lego asked, “Who took my golden teeth?” No one answered. Lego said, “The innocent girl will sing well. The thief will not.”
Apiyo sang: It's not me! It's not me who took the teeth! The one who took is near!Atieno also sang well.
Ajoh sang badly and the words did not come out. Lego shouted, “Sing like the others.” Lego knew that Ajoh took his golden teeth.
Lego swallowed Ajoh. Her sisters ran home to say what happened. The girls' grandmother said sadly, “I warned them, if only Ajohhad listened.”
Hello! This little boy's name is KIYAN.But he has many other names.
Mama calls him LADDOO.She says he is super sweet.Daddy calls him VEDOO.Daddy says he is funny.
Dadi calls him MEAOW MANI.She says his skin is soft like a cat's.
Dadu calls him BUNNY.He says he can only see two teeth.
Ira didi calls him GUNDRU.She says Kiyan is a little rascal.
Sahil bhaiya calls him CINDRU... don't know why!But he says Kiyan throws tantrums!
But when Kiyan plays a prank and hides somewhere, they are ALL angry with him.And shout...KIYAAAAAAAAAN!
WHAT ARE YOUR PET NAMES?
Once upon a King who, due to his age decided to adopt a son who will be the heir of his throne because he didn't have any son.
He then, called all villagers and he chose ten young boys to whom he delivered seeds, asked them to go and plant them and after two weeks the one who will bring the best result will be his adopted son and the heir of his throne.
In one family, one child planted his seed, watered them everyday, did all his best but the grains refused to grow up.
His friends advised him to go to the market and buy corn that he will present to the king so that he can be chosen." I can't do that, my parents taught me to be honest ", said the young boy to his friends.
Time and days passed and the ten boys went to the kingdom palace to show their results.All of them came with some sacks of corn except one child.- What did you do with the seeds? said the king to the empty handed boy.- Majesty, I planted and watered them but they didn't grow up, said the young boy.
The king took the young boy and said: the biggest quality that must have a king is honesty. All your grains were boiled that means they can't grow.Only this boy succeeded and he become my son
Once upon a time, the Eagle and the Hen were great friends. They helped one another in times of need.
They played together. They played with the other animals like the tortoise.
They had a great herd of cows,  sheep, goats and camels. They used to graze together in the plains while playing.
One day hen went to borrow a razor blade from the eagle to shave her children. Eagle gave hen his razor without questioning.
Hen shaved her children neatly. However she forgot to keep the razor safely.
When the eagle came for his razor, hen could not find it. She scratched all over in vain. Eagle became angry and began eating hens chicks.
Hen ran for dear life and went to stay with the humans. Till today hens live with humans and eagles feed on the chickens.
There is something in this world that is better than any thing else in the world.
It is better than food.   It is better than sleep.  It is better than the happy sound of children.
It is better than drinking water.  It is better than the smell of wet soil.  It is better than all existing things.
When you get a job.  Nothing can stop you from working.  Nothing else makes sense to you.
But you only consider the job.  Even if you are told the worst things   about the job you have.
You can never listen to them because all your heart   and mind knows is that the job has to help you achieve  all your dreams in life.
A heart to hate you,
Is as far as the sun
A heart to love you
Is as near as the door.
A heart for me,
And a heart for you.
And a heart for you.
A heart for us all and my puppy
heart heart heart
A heart for mummy
a heart for daddy
Happiness from within the heart
Let me tell you about the palm tree.
This tree lives when everything else is dry.
The shade from a palm tree is always cool.
We eat fruit from the palm tree.
We use palm leaves to thatch our houses.
We make brooms and mats from palm leaves.
We use palm tree seeds for fuel.
Do you see why the palm tree is important?
It's not easy being a tiger.Yes, tigers are beautiful and fierce.
But tigers are also big and heavy.This makes it difficult for them to hunt for food.
Out of every twenty times a tiger hunts,it eats only once.
When a tiger moves through the forest,KHAU! KHAU! KHAK!The langur calls, just like an old man coughing!KHAU! KHAU! KHAK!
AWOOOO! HAWOOOO!The barking deer calls, like a scared dog!AWOOOO! HAWOOOO!
OOW! OOW! OOW!The spotted deer calls, like a little bird!OOW! OOW! OOW!
The whole forest knows the tiger is here!AHUUUN? AHUUUN?The tiger wonders, where has everyone gone?
Bounce, bounce the ball, bounce, bounce the ball
Bounce it to peter, bounce it to dog.
Bounce it away, bounce it so far
Bounce it in the air, and it spin so hard.
Our big ball, the beautiful red ball.
Bounce, bounce the ball, bounce, bounce the ball
I can run withit.
I can jump withit.
I can dance withit.
I can swim withit.
I can skip withit.
I can kick withit.
I can escape withit.
But I can neverfly with it.
A walk in kampala,  what do you see? Shops selling clothes,  in very congested streets.
A shower in Nakivuubo,  what do you see? Owino market,  taxi park,  play ground,  petrol station,  mukwano arcade.
A drive in kampala,  what do you see? Very tall buildings,  very many cars of different types.
Languages in kampala,  what do you hear? Luganda, Swahili,  English and Lunyankole,  all are being spoken.
A breakfast in Kampala,  what do you see? Menvu, black tea, milk tea and Bushera.
A trip to kampala,  do you wish to go back?
So peaceful,comfortable
she does alot of work but can never complainmother,oh mother
my comfort,is her comfortmy joy is her joy
when am sad,your sad tooyou cant rest until am at peace
oh mother i love you so much
Mummy there is a hole in my toothMummy the tooth is painful.
Mummy there is a hole in my toothThe gum is swelling.
Mummy there is a hole in my toothThe gum is bleedingThe head is pounding.
Mummy there is a hole in my toothMy ears are buzzingMy eyes are hurting
Mummy there is a hole in my toothThe weather is coldMy gums are bleeding
Mummy there is a hole in my toothYour hugs and kisses is all i needAnd going to the hospital is not my wish.
Mummy there is a hole in my tooth.The dentist says he can remove my toothThe dentist says no more eating sweets
Mummy there is no pain in my gumsNow  eat,and chew,and talk and smileThe hole,the tooth,the pain is goneThe dentist has removed the painful tooth,
I wonder ifthere's another me somewhere in the world.
Who looks thesame.
And talks thesame.
And even has mycurls.
Someone with myeyes my ears.
Who even has mylaugh.
Who can do what Ican do.
And can't do whatI can't.
I've looked andlooked everywhere to find another me. I went down to the park and looked behindthe trees.
I looked around,up and down.
At every singleface.
I couldn't find anotherme in any single place.
There's only oneme in the world! I'm special, oh it's true!
But not just me,don't you see? There's only one of you!
'Wov! What a lovely raincoat!' Mannu danced happily holding the shining red raincoat that his parents had bought for him.'Mamma, may I wear the raincoat now?' Manu asked his mother.Mamma said, 'No, my child. You can wear it when it rains. It should start raining soon. But as of now I don't see any signs of the rain.'
But, Monday was a bright sunny day, full of golden sunshine.Mannu looked out of the window every now and then and asked his mother,'Mamma, will it rain today?'Mamma  peeped out of the window and said, ' I don't think it will rain today. You cannot wear the raincoat today. People will laugh at you, if you do.'
On Tuesday also Mannu kept looking at the sky. And the raincoat was kept right next to him, ready to be used. But the sky was a nice blue and as bright as it was on Monday.Mannu was disappointed,'Mamma, when will I be able to use the raincoat?''There is just a single cloud in the sky today, and that too a white one. I don't think you will get a chance to wear the raincoat today.'Mamma said.
Wednesday again was a very hot sunny day.Mannu was getting worried, 'Mamma, why is it not raining yet?'He tried to put the raincoat on at home. But had to immediately take it off because he felt too hot in it.Mamma, in her eagerness to comfort him said, 'I think it will rain soon, probably by afternoon.'
On Thursday, there was the school picnic. Mannu was eager to show off the raincoat to his school buddies.'Mamma, shall I carry the raincoat to the picnic. What if it rains there?' Mannu asked.'Don't, my pet. It will not rain today. See those white clouds? And they are also so far away.' Mamma tried to comfort him.
And... at last  on Friday, the sky looked quite dark with black clouds. Mannu kept the raincoat ready at hand.'Mamma, it will rain today, right mamma?' Mannu asked excitedly. The peacock also seemed to think so and started dancing. The tortoise came out of it's hiding and looked up at the sky hoping perhaps to feel cooler after the hot summer.'I think so. Today the sky is full of black clouds.' Mamma smiled at Mannu's excitement and was happy for him.
On the Saturday morning there was a loud thunder.  And also lightening.'Mamma, it that not lightening? Now it will surely rain, right Mamma?' asked Manu.He ran out on the lawns and saw that a frog and a tortoise also had come out of their hiding.
And.. tip...tap...tip...tap... came down the raindrops!Mannu, loved the rains...raincoat or no raincoat.'Oh, it is raining; it is raining.' Thus shouting  Mannu ran out of the house and started  jumping and dancing in the rain. And he had the company of the frog who also seemed to be  waiting for the rains.
'Wait Mannu, wait.' Mamma ran after him with his raincoat in her hand. 'You forgot your raincoat!'But Mannu was very happy getting drenched in rains. The raincoat which he was holding close to himself all this time was all forgotten.
Some one would like to have you for her friend but you are mine.
Someone would like to have you on a costly couch but you are my friend.
Someone would like to place you in a comfortable house to play but you are my friend.
I have you to play with you with few toys but you are my friend.
Someone would like to have you for her friend but you are my friend.
He doesn't carewhether young or oldHe makes you cry
He doesn't careWhether loved or notHe makes you yell
He doesn't careWhether there is painHe still makes you to cry
But why?It is so unfairWhy enemy,Why don't you care?
This is Natabo.She has six brothers.
Her parents giveher a small pot. She loves it.
One day herbrothers break the pot.
Natabo cannotfind her pot. She cries and cries.
Natabo runs away.She climbs a tall tree.
Her parents find her. "Pleasecome down," theyask.
Her brotherssing, "Please come down."
Natabo makes fun of their song.
Then Natabo's friend comes. "Please come down," she sings.
Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.
The friends walk home together.
Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home. Natabo gets a new pot!
Kabali and Kateera are friends.
Kabali has a cat. Kateera has a rabbit.
Kabali plays with his cat every day.
Kateera feeds his rabbit twice a day.
Kateera's rabbit produced six babies. Two rabbits were black. Two rabbits were brown. Two rabbits were white.
Kabali's cat produced three babies. One kitten was male. Two kittens were female.
Kateera sold four of the baby rabbits. He used the money to buy books and pencils for school.
Kabali did not sell any kittens. The people in the village did not want cats.
The night has come again and it is dark.
After meals I go to bed with my young sister Anna.
I am always scared because every night I wet the bed.
Whenever I dream,  I suddenly wake up wet.
I quickly change position and sleep in Anna's which is dry and warm.
In the morning,  I wake up first and leave Anna in bed.
And when mother asks who wet the bed,  I loudly say it is Anna.
So the next day mother decides to sleep with Anna in her bed.
Unfortunately,  the same thing happens and now there is no one to else to blame.
Finally mother finds out that Anna does not wet the bed but I do.
In the past,  rat and frog were friends.
They lived on the same village.
Rat was a farmer of maize,  Frog was not interested in that job. At rat's home food was always there.
His children never knew what famine is His children never got hungry.
At frogs home,  there was always famine This caused frog to always beg maize from Mr Rat.
It never pleased Mr Rat to feed frogs family Mr Rat got a good wisdom that the agriculture department passed a law.
Only maize grain should be eaten not flour. This became very hard for the frog.
From that time to now frog cannot eat maize grain.
A man called Kato lived in Bunghumu village. He used to steal peoples' animals.
One day he went and stole a goat from the neighbouring village. He slaughtered and kept the meat in his house.
The following morning the people found out that Kato had stolen the goat. They started looking for him.
When they reached Kato's home,  they found him roasting the meat.
Ball.
Rope.
T-Shirt.
Netball goal post.
Football goal post.
See-Saw.
Swing.
Prosy wanted a pussy cat.
Prosy's family went to visit the pussy cats.
Prosy wanted this cat. It was too big for her.
Tim wanted this kitten. It was too small for him.
Mum wanted this kitten. It was too quick for her.
Everyone liked this kitten.
They took the kitten.
Everyone is happy with the new pussy cat.
Take me with you to the butter fly park oh flying bus
Up in the air you fly and take me to the  blue clouds
like a blue bird starting to fly, you do mesmerize me
Take me with you oh! flying bus! Like a flying pig.Me in the flying bus
Above the waters of the oceans, high up in the skyTake me with you oh! flying bus
Like a parachute flying over the desert,so beautiful and yellow from the sun's rays,Take me with you!
In the comfort of your seats, just like an aeroplane Take me with you oh flying bus!
Birds talk. And they talk a lot!
WAAAAHHHH!The Brahminy kite wails like a hungry baby.WAAAAHHHH!
FHWEE! FHWEE!The Malabar whistling thrush whistles like a happy child.FHWEE! FHWEE!
HU HU HU HU! HU HU HU HU!The laughing dove laughs as if it's being tickled.HU HU HU HU! HU HU HU HU!
PUK! PUK! PUK!The coppersmith barbet sounds like a hammer striking metal.PUK! PUK! PUK!
WAAAAHHHH! FHWEE! HU HU! PUK! Who is that? That is the racket-tailed drongo who can copy other birds!  WAAAAHHHH! FHWEE! HU HU! PUK!
We may not know what birds are saying, But we know who is talking.
The name of my dog is Stopie.
Stopie likes to bark at night.
Stopie has two puppies.
Stopie's young puppy likes to steal food in the kitchen.
The other puppy has three legs.
The three dogs barks during the day and at night.
My motorcar is motorcar!
Mr. Kalongoota, can you come here
Look at my motorcar!
It is very dirty! please clean it again
Please clean it again! I want it cleaned up for now
My motorcar is motorcar!
I wonder ifthere's another me somewhere in the world.
Who looks thesame.
And talks thesame.
And even has mycurls.
Someone with myeyes my ears.
Who even has mylaugh.
Who can do what Ican do.
And can't do whatI can't.
I've looked andlooked everywhere to find another me. I went down to the park and looked behindthe trees.
I looked around,up and down.
At every singleface.
I couldn't find anotherme in any single place.
There's only oneme in the world! I'm special, oh it's true!
But not just me,don't you see? There's only one of you!
Shanti and Arun were good friends. They had so much fun together.They shared secrets in class. They ran races on the way home.She was always cheerful.
One day, Shanti came into the classroom slowly. Her head was bent. She looked sad. “Did someone scold you?” asked Arun.Shanti shook her head. She sat down and did not look up. She did not answer ‘Present!’ when Sona Miss called her name. Sona Miss called again, louder this time, “Shanti Kumar!” Shanti raised her hand.
“Do you have a sore throat?” her teacher asked her. Shanti shook her head.Her cheeks were red and it looked like she had a fever.“Are you feeling okay?” Sona Miss asked.Shanti nodded, still not daring to look up.
“Why does Shanti look so sad?”“Is your little brother okay?”“Is your puppy okay?”“Is your grandmother okay?”Shanti kept nodding her head to each of her friends. But she did not look up.
Arun wanted to make her smile. He had an idea! He took out something from his bag.As he ran to show it to Shanti, it slipped out of his hands. Shanti saw something flying towards her and she grabbed it.
It was a BIG, green, rubber frog!Shanti's eyes flew open. Then she opened her mouth to laugh.THEN Arun and her friends saw why she had not smiled or talked all day!Four of her front teeth had gone missing!
a footstepboth a friendly and dangerous mark
when lost it is the light of your journeybecause it shows where and where you have not stepped
but remember,it is also the lightof your enemies
that is the power of a foot print
Let me tell youabout the palm tree.
This tree liveswhen everything else is dry.
The shade from apalm tree is always cool.
We eat fruit fromthe palm tree.
We use palmleaves to thatch our houses.
We make broomsand mats from palm leaves.
We use palm treeseeds for fuel.
Do you see whythe palm tree is important?
Kate  has a thing in her head.        How will they remove it?
Itmakes her tired. It pains her.It makes her heavy.
Shecan’t eat. She can’t drink. She is not as jolly as before,
A  doctor is scanning her head.        Oh dear. It’s a pity.   Poorwoman! Her head throbs with pain.
The  doctor has seen a swelling in the head. The  doctor says, “this is a blood tumor.”        “We have to remove it from your  brain right now.”       “We have to remove it now!”  That is what the doctor says
They  bring a stretcher.
They  arrange the surgical blades.
They  inject her with syringes.
They  cut open Kate’s head.
They  remove the brain.
They  cut out the clot of blood.        Kate is like a child.
The  return the brain into the head.        They  stitch the head together
Does Kate feel everything they do?  No!  Kate is in heaven.        She does not feel. Or eat.  She does  not think.        For 24 hours
Then  she comes back to life!
Now she is well.        Now  she speaks straight.        Like a baby newly born.
We  are all happy.          For our friendKate who tasted heaven.
Long, long ago, the Sky God, Nyame, kept all stories locked in a wooden box, high in the sky. People down on earth had no stories to tell and they were very sad. They asked Anansi the clever Spider to help them.
Anansi spun a long thread, and climbed up his sticky thread all the way to heaven. “Can I have the stories, please?” he asked the Sky God. But Nyame laughed at Anansi and said, “Oh, these are very expensive stories. You wouldn't be able to pay for them, little spider.”
“How much do the stories cost?” asked Anansi. “You'll have to bring me three rare and fierce animals,” Nyame answered, “A leopard with sharp teeth like spears, a hornet that stings people, and a snake that swallows people whole.” He laughed and laughed. He thought his stories were quite safe.
So Anansi climbed slowly back down his sticky thread to the earth. He thought and he thought, and he came up with a plan. He dug a deep hole, covered it with branches and dirt so it was hidden, and he went home for supper. In the morning, sure enough, a leopard had fallen into his pit. He was furiously scratching at the side of the pit, but he couldn't get out.
“Oh let me help you, my dear friend!” said Anansi. “Just lie down on these sticks and I'll pull you out.” Anansi wound his sticky web round the leopard and the sticks, and pulled him up to heaven to show the Sky God. But Nyame just laughed and said, “Where are the other two?”
So Anansi went back down to earth to get the second creature. He thought and he thought and he came up with a plan. He took a gourd full of water and went to the tree where the hornets lived. He poured out some of the water all over their nest. Then he cut a leaf from a banana tree and held it over his head, and he poured the rest of the water all over himself.
He called out to the hornets, “Hey hornets! Come see! It is raining! Quick ­get inside my gourd and it will keep all of you dry.” Hornets don't like to get wet, so they all flew into Anansi's gourd.
Then Anansi quickly spun a web across the opening so the hornets couldn't get out no matter how much they buzzed. He carried them up to heaven and showed them to the Sky God. But Nyame just said, “Where's the last one?” (He wasn't laughing so much anymore.).
So Anansi went down to earth again. He thought and thought and he thought, but he couldn't come up with a plan. So he asked his wife, who had a very good idea. Together they found a good long thick branch and some strong vines. When they got near the stream where the snake lived, they began to argue. “The branch is longer!” “No, it isn't!” “Yes it is!”
Soon the snake came out and asked what the argument was. “I was arguing with my wife,” said Anansi. “She says this stick is longer than you are. But I don't agree.” “Of course I'm longer than that stick!” said the snake. “I'm very long! I'm a huge snake! Just put your stick next to me and measure!”
So Anansi did that, and he tied the snake to the stick with his vine to keep him straight. When he was all tied up, Anansi took the snake up to heaven.
Nyame had to admit that Anansi had paid his price. So he went to his wooden box, opened the lid, and gave all the stories to Anansi. Anansi carried the stories triumphantly down to earth. He shared them with his wife, and with all the other animals and people. Stories are for telling, not for keeping in wooden boxes.
tip tip tap tap
tap on the way
she couldn't make a dollar sixteen mills.
she mix, she mix, she mix like this!
tip tip tap tap butterfly for you!
tip tip tap tap says goodnite
One day there was a great famine in the land. No one had anything to eat except the crows. Each morning they flew a long distance to where there was a tree with ripe figs in the middle of a wide river. Then they flew back with the figs for themselves and their relatives. The sight of so many figs made Anansi's mouth water. How could he get them for himself?
He thought of a plan. He carefully covered his bottom with sticky beeswax. Then he took a piece of clay pot and went to see the crows. “Please could you help me?” he asked. “I need a live coal to get my fire going again.” As they were getting the coal from the fire, Anansi carefully sat firmly on one of the largest figs, so that it would stick to his bottom. He thanked the crows, and hurried home to enjoy the fig.
But one fig wasn't enough for him. He went back a second time, and did the same. When he went back a third time, the crows began to get suspicious. “Why do you keep coming back to us to get a coal?” they said. Anansi answered, “Every time when I get home, the coal has burnt out.” “You're lying!” said the crows. “You just want our food!” “That's not true,” said Anansi. And he started crying.
The crows felt sorry for him. The next morning at first light, each crow gave him a feather. He flew with them to the fig tree in the middle of the wide river. When he saw the luscious figs, Anansi wanted them all for himself. Each time a crow tried to pick a fig, he shouted out, “That one is mine! I saw it first!” And then he took the fig and put it into his bag. Eventually he had all the figs and the crows had none.
He was left all alone as the darkness began to fall. “If I don't want to stay in this tree for the rest of my life,” he said to himself, “I'll just have to jump into the air like the crows.” So he took a deep breath, jumped, and PLOP! He fell into the river right among the crocodiles.
“What do we have here?” said a gruff crocodile voice. “A tasty morsel to eat, nyum”. “Oh please don't” said Anansi. And he began to cry. “I'm one of you, don't you know? I got lost in the days of your grandfathers and no one was able to find me. You're the first of my relatives I've ever met!” He cried so much that the crocodiles felt sorry for him.
The oldest crocodile said, “We'll know you're one of us if you can eat and enjoy mud soup just like we do.” They gave him a pot of dirty brown water. “Just like my grandmother used to make it!” Anansi said. But he made a hole in the ground with his back foot, and a hole in the pot with his front foot. As he pretended to drink the soup, it oozed down through the pot into the hole beneath his feet.
“Delicious!” he exclaimed, giving back the empty pot. "Now we know you are definitely one of us," the crocodiles said. So they allowed Anansi to sleep in their hole with them for the night. "Tomorrow morning I'll tell you the story of my life," said Anansi as they fell asleep.
Early the next morning, before first light, Anansi woke up one of the crocodiles. "I want to go and fetch my wife and children from across the river, so that they can help me tell my story. Will you help me before the others wake up?" he asked the crocodile.
The crocodile was grumpy at being woken up so early. “Please help me! You swim much faster than I do,” Anansi said. The crocodile agreed, and Anansi rode on his back to the bank of the river. He climbed off quickly. “I'll be back soon! Don't go away!” Anansi said, as he disappeared through the grass.
As far as we know, the crocodile is waiting for him still, with just his long snout and his beady eyes above the surface of the river.
One elephant isgoing to drink water.
Two giraffes are going to drink water.
Three buffaloesand four birds are also going to drink water.
Five antelopes and warthogs are walking to the water.
Seven zebras are running to the water.
Eight frogs and nine fish are swimming in the water.
One lion roars. He also wants to drink. Who is afraid of the lion?
One elephant is drinking water with the lion.
Hi! I am Neema. Just like you, I love to eat. Here are are some things that I eat: Dhokla , Panipuri and Jalebi.
Yum Yum! Where is this noise coming from? Oh! it's Neema who is eating.
Neema loves mangoes.
She loves all fruits.
It is raining. What is Neema doing? Let us see.
Oh! Neema is eating jamuns, pineapples and corn.Yummy! She says.
Oh! it is winter.Let us see what Neema is doing.
Oh! Neema is eating custard apple , beetroot and imlis
Neema loves to eat. Just like us.
Today is my first day of school. Mother held my hand and walking with me. "Now I have grown up," I say. "Come...come!"Mother held my hand tightly.
There are many children near the school.Some come by bus. Some come by car.Some come by rickshaw. Some come by bicycle and some come on foot, like me.
We reached to the gate.Mother left my hand.She stopped on gate. I have to go alone inside.Many unknown faces are around me.
I moved one step. I moved another step.  I looked behind. As I move forward, mother looks smaller. Would she disappeared? I ran to her. I don't think I've grown up. I hold her hand and say, "don't go".
All had gone inside. Only I was outside. Teacher came outside.She smiles after looking me. I also smiles. Mother says," Rani I will meet you here when you come out". I leave her hand. She waive her hand.
I ran inside. Mother would meet there on leave.
I can run withit.
I can jump withit.
I can dance withit.
I can swim withit.
I can skip withit.
I can kick withit.
I can escape withit.
But I can neverfly with it.
The rich man doesn't know how to interact with the poor man.
When they walk with their feet, he drives his car with his hands.
When you complain to a rich man about how you have not eaten.
he will not understand why, simply because even his dogs have excess to eat.
The face of a rich man will always look young when they are old and  old when they are young.
The stomach of a rich man keeps swelling from too much satisfaction from what life has to offer
Money has made the rich man forget about humanity.
